《孙子兵法》查看《孙子兵法》书评和最新更新以及相关书籍推荐请到《孙子兵法》专题网址http:///gudai/3248/ 




始计第一

  www.7wenxue.com

	孙子曰：

	兵者，国之大事，死生之地，存亡之道，不可不察也。故经之以五事，校之以计，而索其情：一曰道，二曰天，三曰地，四曰将，五曰法。道者，令民于上同意，可与之死，可与之生，而不危也；天者，阴阳、寒暑、时制也；地者，远近、险易、广狭、死生也；将者，智、信、仁、勇、严也；法者，曲制、官道、主用也。凡此五者，将莫不闻，知之者胜，不知之者不胜。故校之以计，而索其情，曰：主孰有道？将孰有能？天地孰得？法令孰行？兵众孰强？士卒孰练？赏罚孰明？吾以此知胜负矣。将听吾计，用之必胜，留之；将不听吾计，用之必败，去之。计利以听，乃为之势，以佐其外。势者，因利而制权也。兵者，诡道也。故能而示之不能，用而示之不用，近而示之远，远而示之近。利而诱之，乱而取之，实而备之，强而避之，怒而挠之，卑而骄之，佚而劳之，亲而离之，攻其无备，出其不意。此兵家之胜，不可先传也。夫未战而庙算胜者，得算多也；未战而庙算不胜者，得算少也。多算胜少算，而况于无算乎！吾以此观之，胜负见矣。






作战第二

&下&书_ 网

	孙子曰：

	凡用兵之法，驰车千驷，革车千乘，带甲十万，千里馈粮。则内外之费，宾客之用，胶漆之材，车甲之奉，日费千金，然后十万之师举矣。其用战也，胜久则钝兵挫锐，攻城则力屈，久暴师则国用不足。夫钝兵挫锐，屈力殚货，则诸侯乘其弊而起，虽有智者不能善其后矣。故兵闻拙速，未睹巧之久也。夫兵久而国利者，未之有也。故不尽知用兵之害者，则不能尽知用兵之利也。

	

	善用兵者，役不再籍，粮不三载，取用于国，因粮于敌，故军食可足也。国之贫于师者远输，远输则百姓贫；近师者贵卖，贵卖则百姓财竭，财竭则急于丘役。力屈中原、内虚于家，百姓之费，十去其七；公家之费，破军罢马，甲胄矢弓，戟盾矛橹，丘牛大车，十去其六。故智将务食于敌，食敌一钟，当吾二十钟；□①杆一石，当吾二十石。故杀敌者，怒也；取敌之利者，货也。车战得车十乘以上，赏其先得者而更其旌旗。车杂而乘之，卒善而养之，是谓胜敌而益强。故兵贵胜，不贵久。故知兵之将，民之司命。国家安危之主也。

	

	【注：】

	①：“忌”加“艹”头。






谋攻第三



	孙子曰：

	夫用兵之法，全国为上，破国次之；全军为上，破军次之；全旅为上，破旅次之；全卒为上，破卒次之；全伍为上，破伍次之。

	是故百战百胜，非善之善也；不战而屈人之兵，善之善者也。故上兵伐谋，其次伐交，其次伐兵，其下攻城。攻城之法，为不得已。修橹□①□②，具器械，三月而后成；距堙，又三月而后已。将不胜其忿而蚁附之，杀士卒三分之一，而城不拔者，此攻之灾也。故善用兵者，屈人之兵而非战也，拔人之城而非攻也，毁人之国而非久也，必以全争于天下，故兵不顿而利可全，此谋攻之法也。故用兵之法，十则围之，五则攻之，倍则分之，敌则能战之，少则能逃之，不若则能避之。故小敌之坚，大敌之擒也。夫将者，国之辅也。辅周则国必强，辅隙则国必弱。故君之所以患于军者三：不知军之不可以进而谓之进，不知军之不可以退而谓之退，是谓縻军；不知三军之事而同三军之政，则军士惑矣；不知三军之权而同三军之任，则军士疑矣。三军既惑且疑，则诸侯之难至矣。是谓乱军引胜。故知胜有五：知可以战与不可以战者胜，识众寡之用者胜，上下同欲者胜，以虞待不虞者胜，将能而君不御者胜。此五者，知胜之道也。故曰：知己知彼，百战不贻；不知彼而知己，一胜一负；不知彼不知己，每战必败。

	

	【注：】

	①：［车贲］。

	②：“温”字“氵”旁换“车”旁。






军形第四



	孙子曰：

	昔之善战者，先为不可胜，以待敌之可胜。不可胜在己，可胜在敌。故善战者，能为不可胜，不能使敌之必可胜。故曰：胜可知，而不可为。不可胜者，守也；可胜者，攻也。守则不足，攻则有余。善守者藏于九地之下，善攻者动于九天之上，故能自保而全胜也。见胜不过众人之所知，非善之善者也；战胜而天下曰善，非善之善者也。故举秋毫不为多力，见日月不为明目，闻雷霆不为聪耳。古之所谓善战者，胜于易胜者也。故善战者之胜也，无智名，无勇功，故其战胜不忒。不忒者，其所措胜，胜已败者也。故善战者，立于不败之地，而不失敌之败也。是故胜兵先胜而后求战，败兵先战而后求胜。善用兵者，修道而保法，故能为胜败之政。兵法：一曰度，二曰量，三曰数，四曰称，五曰胜。地生度，度生量，量生数，数生称，称生胜。故胜兵若以镒称铢，败兵若以铢称镒。

	称胜者之战民也，若决积水于千仞之溪者，形也。






兵势第五

下*书 网

	孙子曰：

	凡治众如治寡，分数是也；斗众如斗寡，形名是也；三军之众，可使必受敌而无败者，奇正是也；兵之所加，如以□①投卵者，虚实是也。凡战者，以正合，以奇胜。故善出奇者，无穷如天地，不竭如江海。终而复始，日月是也。死而更生，四时是也。声不过五，五声之变，不可胜听也；色不过五，五色之变，不可胜观也；味不过五，五味之变，不可胜尝也；战势不过奇正，奇正之变，不可胜穷也。奇正相生，如循环之无端，孰能穷之哉！激水之疾，至于漂石者，势也；鸷鸟之疾，至于毁折者，节也。故善战者，其势险，其节短。势如扩弩，节如发机。纷纷纭纭，斗乱而不可乱；浑浑沌沌，形圆而不可败。乱生于治，怯生于勇，弱生于强。治乱，数也；勇怯，势也；强弱，形也。故善动敌者，形之，敌必从之；予之，敌必取之。以利动之，以卒待之。故善战者，求之于势，不责于人故能择人而任势。任势者，其战人也，如转木石。木石之性，安则静，危则动，方则止，圆则行。故善战人之势，如转圆石于千仞之山者，势也。

	

	【注：】

	①：“瑕”的“王”旁换“石”旁。






虚实第六

下…… 书 ……网

	孙子曰：

	凡先处战地而待敌者佚，后处战地而趋战者劳。故善战者，致人而不致于人。能使敌人自至者，利之也；能使敌人不得至者，害之也。故敌佚能劳之，饱能饥之，安能动之。出其所必趋，趋其所不意。行千里而不劳者，行于无人之地也；攻而必取者，攻其所不守也。守而必固者，守其所必攻也。故善攻者，敌不知其所守；善守者，敌不知其所攻。微乎微乎，至于无形；神乎神乎，至于无声，故能为敌之司命。进而不可御者，冲其虚也；退而不可追者，速而不可及也。故我欲战，敌虽高垒深沟，不得不与我战者，攻其所必救也；我不欲战，虽画地而守之，敌不得与我战者，乖其所之也。故形人而我无形，则我专而敌分。我专为一，敌分为十，是以十攻其一也。则我众敌寡，能以众击寡者，则吾之所与战者约矣。吾所与战之地不可知，不可知则敌所备者多，敌所备者多，则吾所与战者寡矣。故备前则后寡，备后则前寡，备左则右寡，备右则左寡，无所不备，则无所不寡。寡者，备人者也；众者，使人备己者也。故知战之地，知战之日，则可千里而会战；不知战之地，不知战日，则左不能救右，右不能救左，前不能救后，后不能救前，而况远者数十里，近者数里乎！以吾度之，越人之兵虽多，亦奚益于胜哉！故曰：胜可为也。敌虽众，可使无斗。故策之而知得失之计，候之而知动静之理，形之而知死生之地，角之而知有余不足之处。故形兵之极，至于无形。无形则深间不能窥，智者不能谋。因形而措胜于众，众不能知。人皆知我所以胜之形，而莫知吾所以制胜之形。故其战胜不复，而应形于无穷。夫兵形象水，水之行避高而趋下，兵之形避实而击虚；水因地而制流，兵因敌而制胜。故兵无常势，水无常形。能因敌变化而取胜者，谓之神。故五行无常胜，四时无常位，日有短长，月有死生。


www．Ｌｚｕｏｗｅｎ．ｃｏｍ



军争第七



	孙子曰：

	凡用兵之法，将受命于君，合军聚众，交和而舍，莫难于军争。军争之难者，以迂为直，以患为利。故迂其途，而诱之以利，后人发，先人至，此知迂直之计者也。军争为利，军争为危。举军而争利则不及，委军而争利则辎重捐。是故卷甲而趋，日夜不处，倍道兼行，百里而争利，则擒三将军，劲者先，疲者后，其法十一而至；五十里而争利，则蹶上将军，其法半至；三十里而争利，则三分之二至。是故军无辎重则亡，无粮食则亡，无委积则亡。故不知诸侯之谋者，不能豫交；不知山林、险阻、沮泽之形者，不能行军；不用乡导者，不能得地利。故兵以诈立，以利动，以分和为变者也。故其疾如风，其徐如林，侵掠如火，不动如山，难知如阴，动如雷震。掠乡分众，廓地分利，悬权而动。先知迂直之计者胜，此军争之法也。《军政》曰： “言不相闻，故为之金鼓；视不相见，故为之旌旗。”夫金鼓旌旗者，所以一民之耳目也。民既专一，则勇者不得独进，怯者不得独退，此用众之法也。故夜战多金鼓，昼战多旌旗，所以变人之耳目也。三军可夺气，将军可夺心。是故朝气锐，昼气惰，暮气归。善用兵者，避其锐气，击其惰归，此治气者也。以治待乱，以静待哗，此治心者也。以近待远，以佚待劳，以饱待饥，此治力者也。无邀正正之旗，无击堂堂之陈，此治变者也。故用兵之法，高陵勿向，背丘勿逆，佯北勿从，锐卒勿攻，饵兵勿食，归师勿遏，围师遗阙，穷寇勿迫，此用兵之法也。






九变第八



	孙子曰：

	凡用兵之法，将受命于君，合军聚合。泛地无舍，衢地合交，绝地无留，围地则谋，死地则战，途有所不由，军有所不击，城有所不攻，地有所不争，君命有所不受。故将通于九变之利者，知用兵矣；将不通九变之利，虽知地形，不能得地之利矣；治兵不知九变之术，虽知五利，不能得人之用矣。是故智者之虑，必杂于利害，杂于利而务可信也，杂于害而患可解也。是故屈诸侯者以害，役诸侯者以业，趋诸侯者以利。故用兵之法，无恃其不来，恃吾有以待之；无恃其不攻，恃吾有所不可攻也。故将有五危，必死可杀，必生可虏，忿速可侮，廉洁可辱，爱民可烦。凡此五者，将之过也，用兵之灾也。覆军杀将，必以五危，不可不察也。






行军第九



	孙子曰：

	凡处军相敌，绝山依谷，视生处高，战隆无登，此处山之军也。绝水必远水，客绝水而来，勿迎之于水内，令半渡而击之利，欲战者，无附于水而迎客，视生处高，无迎水流，此处水上之军也。绝斥泽，唯亟去无留，若交军于斥泽之中，必依水草而背众树，此处斥泽之军也。平陆处易，右背高，前死后生，此处平陆之军也。凡此四军之利，黄帝之所以胜四帝也。凡军好高而恶下，贵阳而贱阴，养生而处实，军无百疾，是谓必胜。丘陵堤防，必处其阳而右背之，此兵之利，地之助也。上雨水流至，欲涉者，待其定也。凡地有绝涧、天井、天牢、天罗、天陷、天隙，必亟去之，勿近也。吾远之，敌近之；吾迎之，敌背之。军旁有险阻、潢井、蒹葭、小林、□①荟者，必谨覆索之，此伏奸之所处也。敌近而静者，恃其险也；远而挑战者，欲人之进也；其所居易者，利也；众树动者，来也；众草多障者，疑也；鸟起者，伏也；兽骇者，覆也；尘高而锐者，车来也；卑而广者，徒来也；散而条达者，樵采也；少而往来者，营军也；辞卑而备者，进也；辞强而进驱者，退也；轻车先出居其侧者，陈也；无约而请和者，谋也；奔走而陈兵者，期也；半进半退者，诱也；杖而立者，饥也；汲而先饮者，渴也；见利而不进者，劳也；鸟集者，虚也；夜呼者，恐也；军扰者，将不重也；旌旗动者，乱也；吏怒者，倦也；杀马肉食者，军无粮也；悬□②不返其舍者，穷寇也；谆谆□③□③，徐与人言者，失众也；数赏者，窘也；数罚者，困也；先暴而后畏其众者，不精之至也；来委谢者，欲休息也。兵怒而相迎，久而不合，又不相去，必谨察之。兵非贵益多也，惟无武进，足以并力料敌取人而已。夫惟无虑而易敌者，必擒于人。卒未亲而罚之，则不服，不服则难用。卒已亲附而罚不行，则不可用。故合之以文，齐之以武，是谓必取。令素行以教其民，则民服；令素不行以教其民，则民不服。令素行者，与众相得也。

	

	【注：】

	①：“翳”加“艹”头。

	②：［垂瓦］。

	③：［讠翕］。






地形第十

   

	孙子曰：

	地形有通者、有挂者、有支者、有隘者、有险者、有远者。我可以往，彼可以来，曰通。通形者，先居高阳，利粮道，以战则利。可以往，难以返，曰挂。挂形者，敌无备，出而胜之，敌若有备，出而不胜，难以返，不利。我出而不利，彼出而不利，曰支。支形者，敌虽利我，我无出也，引而去之，令敌半出而击之利。隘形者，我先居之，必盈之以待敌。若敌先居之，盈而勿从，不盈而从之。险形者，我先居之，必居高阳以待敌；若敌先居之，引而去之，勿从也。远形者，势均难以挑战，战而不利。凡此六者，地之道也，将之至任，不可不察也。凡兵有走者、有驰者、有陷者、有崩者、有乱者、有北者。凡此六者，非天地之灾，将之过也。夫势均，以一击十，曰走；卒强吏弱，曰驰；吏强卒弱，曰陷；大吏怒而不服，遇敌怼而自战，将不知其能，曰崩；将弱不严，教道不明，吏卒无常，陈兵纵横，曰乱；将不能料敌，以少合众，以弱击强，兵无选锋，曰北。凡此六者，败之道也，将之至任，不可不察也。夫地形者，兵之助也。料敌制胜，计险隘远近，上将之道也。知此而用战者必胜，不知此而用战者必败。故战道必胜，主曰无战，必战可也；战道不胜，主曰必战，无战可也。故进不求名，退不避罪，唯民是保，而利于主，国之宝也。视卒如婴儿，故可以与之赴深溪；视卒如爱子，故可与之俱死。厚而不能使，爱而不能令，乱而不能治，譬若骄子，不可用也。知吾卒之可以击，而不知敌之不可击，胜之半也；知敌之可击，而不知吾卒之不可以击，胜之半也；知敌之可击，知吾卒之可以击，而不知地形之不可以战，胜之半也。故知兵者，动而不迷，举而不穷。故曰：知彼知己，胜乃不殆；知天知地，胜乃可全。






九地第十一

下…书 网

	孙子曰：

	用兵之法，有散地，有轻地，有争地，有交地，有衢地，有重地，有泛地，有围地，有死地。诸侯自战其地者，为散地；入人之地不深者，为轻地；我得亦利，彼得亦利者，为争地；我可以往，彼可以来者，为交地；诸侯之地三属，先至而得天下众者，为衢地；入人之地深，背城邑多者，为重地；山林、险阻、沮泽，凡难行之道者，为泛地；所由入者隘，所从归者迂，彼寡可以击吾之众者，为围地；疾战则存，不疾战则亡者，为死地。是故散地则无战，轻地则无止，争地则无攻，交地则无绝，衢地则合交，重地则掠，泛地则行，围地则谋，死地则战。古之善用兵者，能使敌人前后不相及，众寡不相恃，贵贱不相救，上下不相收，卒离而不集，兵合而不齐。合于利而动，不合于利而止。敢问敌众而整将来，待之若何曰：先夺其所爱则听矣。兵之情主速，乘人之不及。由不虞之道，攻其所不戒也。凡为客之道，深入则专。主人不克，掠于饶野，三军足食。谨养而勿劳，并气积力，运兵计谋，为不可测。

	投之无所往，死且不北。死焉不得，士人尽力。兵士甚陷则不惧，无所往则固，深入则拘，不得已则斗。是故其兵不修而戒，不求而得，不约而亲，不令而信，禁祥去疑，至死无所之。

	吾士无余财，非恶货也；无余命，非恶寿也。令发之日，士卒坐者涕沾襟，偃卧者涕交颐，投之无所往，诸、刿之勇也。故善用兵者，譬如率然。率然者，常山之蛇也。击其首则尾至，击其尾则首至，击其中则首尾俱至。敢问兵可使如率然乎？曰可。夫吴人与越人相恶也，当其同舟而济而遇风，其相救也如左右手。是故方马埋轮，未足恃也；齐勇如一，政之道也；刚柔皆得，地之理也。故善用兵者，携手若使一人，不得已也。

	将军之事，静以幽，正以治，能愚士卒之耳目，使之无知；易其事，革其谋，使人无识；易其居，迂其途，使民不得虑。帅与之期，如登高而去其梯；帅与之深入诸侯之地，而发其机。若驱群羊，驱而往，驱而来，莫知所之。聚三军之众，投之于险，此谓将军之事也。

	九地之变，屈伸之力，人情之理，不可不察也。

	凡为客之道，深则专，浅则散。去国越境而师者，绝地也；四彻者，衢地也；入深者，重地也；入浅者，轻地也；背固前隘者，围地也；无所往者，死地也。

	是故散地吾将一其志，轻地吾将使之属，争地吾将趋其后，交地吾将谨其守，交地吾将固其结，衢地吾将谨其恃，重地吾将继其食，泛地吾将进其途，围地吾将塞其阙，死地吾将示之以不活。

	故兵之情：围则御，不得已则斗，过则从。

	是故不知诸侯之谋者，不能预交；不知山林、险阻、沮泽之形者，不能行军；不用乡导，不能得地利。四五者，一不知，非霸王之兵也。夫霸王之兵，伐大国，则其众不得聚；威加于敌，则其交不得合。是故不争天下之交，不养天下之权，信己之私，威加于敌，则其城可拔，其国可隳。

	施无法之赏，悬无政之令。犯三军之众，若使一人。犯之以事，勿告以言；犯之以害，勿告以利。投之亡地然后存，陷之死地然后生。夫众陷于害，然后能为胜败。

	故为兵之事，在顺详敌之意，并敌一向，千里杀将，是谓巧能成事。是故政举之日，夷关折符，无通其使，厉于廊庙之上，以诛其事。敌人开阖，必亟入之，先其所爱，微与之期，践墨随敌，以决战事。是故始如处女，敌人开户；后如脱兔，敌不及拒。






火攻第十二

/

	孙子曰：

	凡火攻有五：一曰火人，二曰火积，三曰火辎，四曰火库，五曰火队。

	行火必有因，因必素具。发火有时，起火有日。时者，天之燥也。日者，月在箕、壁、翼、轸也。凡此四宿者，风起之日也。凡火攻，必因五火之变而应之：火发于内，则早应之于外；火发而其兵静者，待而勿攻，极其火力，可从而从之，不可从则上。火可发于外，无待于内，以时发之，火发上风，无攻下风，昼风久，夜风止。凡军必知五火之变，以数守之。

	故以火佐攻者明，以水佐攻者强。水可以绝，不可以夺。

	夫战胜攻取而不惰其功者凶，命曰“费留”。故曰：明主虑之，良将惰之，非利不动，非得不用，非危不战。主不可以怒而兴师，将不可以愠而攻战。合于利而动，不合于利而上。怒可以复喜，愠可以复说，亡国不可以复存，死者不可以复生。故明主慎之，良将警之。此安国全军之道也。


www.56ｗeｎ．ＣＯＭ



用间第十三

下 //书 //网

	孙子曰：

	凡兴师十万，出征千里，百姓之费，公家之奉，日费千金，内外骚动，怠于道路，不得操事者，七十万家。相守数年，以争一日之胜，而爱爵禄百金，不知敌之情者，不仁之至也，非民之将也，非主之佐也，非胜之主也。故明君贤将所以动而胜人，成功出于众者，先知也。先知者，不可取于鬼神，不可象于事，不可验于度，必取于人，知敌之情者也。

	故用间有五：有因间，有内间，有反间，有死间，有生间。五间俱起，莫知其道，是谓神纪，人君之宝也。乡间者，因其乡人而用之；内间者，因其官人而用之；反间者，因其敌间而用之；死间者，为诳事于外，令吾闻知之而传于敌间也；生间者，反报也。故三军之事，莫亲于间，赏莫厚于间，事莫密于间，非圣贤不能用间，非仁义不能使间，非微妙不能得间之实。微哉微哉！无所不用间也。间事未发而先闻者，间与所告者兼死。凡军之所欲击，城之所欲攻，人之所欲杀，必先知其守将、左右、谒者、门者、舍人之姓名，令吾间必索知之。敌间之来间我者，因而利之，导而舍之，故反间可得而用也；因是而知之，故乡间、内间可得而使也；因是而知之，故死间为诳事，可使告敌；因是而知之，故生间可使如期。五间之事，主必知之，知之必在于反间，故反间不可不厚也。

	昔殷之兴也，伊挚在夏；周之兴也，吕牙在殷。故明君贤将，能以上智为间者，必成大功。此兵之要，三军之所恃而动也。






英文版  始计第一  Laying Plans

/

	孙子曰：兵者，国之大事，死生之地，存亡之道，不可不察也。 

	sun tzu said: the art of war is of vital importance to the state. it is a matter of life and death, a road either to safety or to ruin. hence it is a subject of inquiry which can on no account be neglected. 



	故经之以五事，校之以计，而索其情：一曰道，二曰天，三曰地，四曰将，五曰法。 

	the art of war, then, is governed by five constant factors, to be taken into account in one&#39;s deliberations, when seeking to determine the conditions obtaining in the field. 

	these are: (1) the moral law; (2) heaven; (3) earth; (4) the commander; (5) method and discipline. 



	道者，令民于上同意，可与之死，可与之生，而不危也； 

	the moral law causes the people to be in complete accord with their ruler, so that they will follow him regardless of their lives, undismayed by any danger. 



	天者，阴阳、寒暑、时制也； 

	heaven signifies night and day, cold and heat, times and seasons. 



	地者，远近、险易、广狭、死生也； 

	earth comprises distances, great and small; danger and security; open ground and narrow passes; the chances of life and death. 



	将者，智、信、仁、勇、严也； 

	the commander stands for the virtues of wisdom, sincerely, benevolence, courage and strictness. 



	法者，曲制、官道、主用也。 

	by method and discipline are to be understood the marshaling of the army in its proper subdivisions, the graduations of rank among the officers, the maintenance of roads by which supplies may reach the army, and the control of military expenditure. 



	凡此五者，将莫不闻，知之者胜，不知之者不胜。 

	these five heads should be familiar to every general: he who knows them will be victorious; he who knows them not will fail. 



	故校之以计，而索其情，曰：主孰有道？ 

	therefore, in your deliberations, when seeking to determine the military conditions, let them be made the basis of a comparison, in this wise:-- 



	将孰有能？天地孰得？法令孰行？兵众孰强？士卒孰练？赏罚孰明？吾以此知胜负矣。 

	(1) which of the two sovereigns is imbued with the moral law? (2) which of the two generals has most ability? (3) with whom lie the advantages derived from heaven and earth? (4) on which side is discipline most rigorously enforced? (5) which army is stronger? (6) on which side are officers and men more highly trained? (7) in which army is there the greater constancy both in reward and punishment? 

	by means of these seven considerations i can forecast victory or defeat. 



	将听吾计，用之必胜，留之；将不听吾计，用之必败，去之。 

	the general that hearkens to my counsel and acts upon it, will conquer: let such a one be retained in command! the general that hearkens not to my counsel nor acts upon it, will suffer defeat:--let such a one be dismissed! 



	计利以听，乃为之势，以佐其外。 

	while heading the profit of my counsel, avail yourself also of any helpful circumstances over and beyond the ordinary rules. 



	势者，因利而制权也。 

	according as circumstances are favorable, one should modify one&#39;s plans. 



	兵者，诡道也。 

	all warfare is based on deception. 



	故能而示之不能，用而示之不用，近而示之远，远而示之近。 

	hence, when able to attack, we must seem unable; when using our forces, we must seem inactive; when we are near, we must make the enemy believe we are far away; when far away, we must make him believe we are near. 



	利而诱之，乱而取之， 

	hold out baits to entice the enemy. feign disorder, and crush him. 



	实而备之，强而避之， 

	if he is secure at all points, be prepared for him. if he is in superior strength, evade him. 



	怒而挠之，卑而骄之， 

	if your opponent is of choleric temper, seek to irritate him. pretend to be weak, that he may grow arrogant. 



	佚而劳之，亲而离之， 

	if he is taking his ease, give him no rest. if his forces are united, separate them. 



	攻其无备，出其不意。 

	attack him where he is unprepared, appear where you are not expected. 



	此兵家之胜，不可先传也。 

	these military devices, leading to victory, must not be divulged beforehand. 



	夫未战而庙算胜者，得算多也；未战而庙算不胜者，得算少也。多算胜少算，而况于无算乎！吾以此观之，胜负见矣。 

	now the general who wins a battle makes many calculations in his temple where the battle is fought. the general who loses a battle makes but few calculations beforehand. thus do many calculations lead to victory, and few calculations to defeat: how much more no calculation at all! it is by attention to this point that i can foresee who is likely to win or lose.






作战第二

．

	孙子曰：凡用兵之法，驰车千驷，革车千乘，带甲十万，千里馈粮。则内外之费，宾客之用，胶 

	漆之材，车甲之奉，日费千金，然后十万之师举矣。 

	sun tzu said: in the operations of war, where there are in the field a thousand swift chariots, as many heavy chariots, and a hundred thousand mail-clad soldiers, with provisions enough to carry them a thousand li, the expenditure at home and at the front, including entertainment of guests, small items such as glue and paint, and sums spent on chariots and armor, will reach the total of a thousand ounces of silver per day. such is the cost of raising an army of 100,000 men. 



	其用战也，胜久则钝兵挫锐，攻城则力屈， 

	when you engage in actual fighting, if victory is long in coming, then men&#39;s weapons will grow dull and their ardor will be damped. if you lay siege to a town, you will exhaust your strength. 



	久暴师则国用不足。 

	again, if the campaign is protracted, the resources of the state will not be equal to the strain. 



	夫钝兵挫锐，屈力殚货，则诸侯乘其弊而起，虽有智者不能善其后矣。 

	now, when your weapons are dulled, your ardor damped, your strength exhausted and your treasure spent, other chieftains will spring up to take advantage of your extremity. then no man, however wise, will be able to avert the consequences that must ensue. 



	故兵闻拙速，未睹巧之久也。 

	thus, though we have heard of stupid haste in war, cleverness has never been seen associated with long delays. 



	夫兵久而国利者，未之有也。 

	there is no instance of a country having benefited from prolonged warfare. 



	故不尽知用兵之害者，则不能尽知用兵之利也。 

	it is only one who is thoroughly acquainted with the evils of war that can thoroughly understand the profitable way of carrying it on. 



	善用兵者，役不再籍，粮不三载， 

	the skillful soldier does not raise a second levy, neither are his supply-wagons loaded more than twice. 



	取用于国，因粮于敌，故军食可足也。 

	bring war material with you from home, but forage on the enemy. thus the army will have food enough for its needs. 



	国之贫于师者远输，远输则百姓贫； 

	poverty of the state exchequer causes an army to be maintained by contributions from a distance. contributing to maintain an army at a distance causes the people to be impoverished. 



	近师者贵卖，贵卖则百姓财竭， 

	on the other hand, the proximity of an army causes prices to go up; and high prices cause the people&#39;s substance to be drained away. 



	财竭则急于丘役。 

	when their substance is drained away, the peasantry will be afflicted by heavy exactions. 



	力屈中原、内虚于家，百姓之费，十去其七；公家之费，破军罢马，甲胄矢弓，戟盾矛橹，丘牛大车，十去其六。 

	with this loss of substance and exhaustion of strength, the homes of the people will be stripped bare, and three-tenths of their income will be dissipated; while government expenses for broken chariots, worn-out horses, breast-plates and helmets, bows and arrows, spears and shields, protective mantles, draught-oxen and heavy wagons, will amount to four-tenths of its total revenue. 



	故智将务食于敌，食敌一钟，当吾二十钟；□①杆一石，当吾二十石。 

	hence a wise general makes a point of foraging on the enemy. one cartload of the enemy&#39;s provisions is equivalent to twenty of one&#39;s own, and likewise a single picul of his provender is equivalent to twenty from one&#39;s own store. 



	故杀敌者，怒也；取敌之利者，货也。 

	now in order to kill the enemy, our men must be roused to anger; that there may be advantage from defeating the enemy, they must have their rewards. 



	车战得车十乘以上，赏其先得者而更其旌旗。车杂而乘之，卒善而养之，是谓胜敌而益强。 

	therefore in chariot fighting, when ten or more chariots have been taken, those should be rewarded who took the first. our own flags should be substituted for those of the enemy, and the chariots mingled and used in conjunction with ours. the captured soldiers should be kindly treated and kept. this is called, using the conquered foe to augment one&#39;s own strength. 



	故兵贵胜，不贵久。 

	in war, then, let your great object be victory, not lengthy campaigns. 



	故知兵之将，民之司命。国家安危之主也。 

	thus it may be known that the leader of armies is the arbiter of the people&#39;s fate, the man on whom it depends whether the nation shall be in peace or in peril. 



	【注：】①：“忌”加“艹”头。


wwＷ、xiabook.com



谋攻第三 III. Attack by Stratagem



	孙子曰：夫用兵之法，全国为上，破国次之；全军为上，破军次之；全旅为上，破旅次之；全卒 

	为上，破卒次之；全伍为上，破伍次之。 

	sun tzu said: in the practical art of war, the best thing of all is to take the enemy&#39;s country whole and intact; to shatter and destroy it is not so good. so, too, it is better to recapture an army entire than to destroy it, to capture a regiment, a detachment or a company entire than to destroy them. 



	是故百战百胜，非善之善也；不战而屈人之兵，善之善者也。 

	hence to fight and conquer in all your battles is not supreme excellence; supreme excellence consists in breaking the enemy&#39;s resistance without fighting. 



	故上兵伐谋，其次伐交，其次伐兵，其下攻城。 

	thus the highest form of generalship is to balk the enemy&#39;s plans; the next best is to prevent the junction of the enemy&#39;s forces; the next in order is to attack the enemy&#39;s army in the field; and the worst policy of all is to besiege walled cities. 



	攻城之法，为不得已。修橹□①□②，具器械，三月而后成；距堙，又三月而后已。 

	the rule is, not to besiege walled cities if it can possibly be avoided. the preparation of mantlets, movable shelters, and various implements of war, will take up three whole months; and the piling up of mounds over against the walls will take three months more. 



	将不胜其忿而蚁附之，杀士卒三分之一，而城不拔者，此攻之灾也。 

	the general, unable to control his irritation, will launch his men to the assault like swarming ants, with the result that one-third of his men are slain, while the town still remains untaken. such are the disastrous effects of a siege. 



	故善用兵者，屈人之兵而非战也，拔人之城而非攻也，毁人之国而非久也， 

	therefore the skillful leader subdues the enemy&#39;s troops without any fighting; he captures their cities without laying siege to them; he overthrows their kingdom without lengthy operations in the field. 



	必以全争于天下，故兵不顿而利可全，此谋攻之法也。 

	with his forces intact he will dispute the mastery of the empire, and thus, without losing a man, his triumph will be complete. this is the method of attacking by stratagem. 



	故用兵之法，十则围之，五则攻之，倍则分之， 

	it is the rule in war, if our forces are ten to the enemy&#39;s one, to surround him; if five to one, to attack him; if twice as numerous, to divide our army into two. 



	敌则能战之，少则能逃之，不若则能避之。 

	if equally matched, we can offer battle; if slightly inferior in numbers, we can avoid the enemy; if quite unequal in every way, we can flee from him. 



	故小敌之坚，大敌之擒也。 

	hence, though an obstinate fight may be made by a small force, in the end it must be captured by the larger force. 



	夫将者，国之辅也。辅周则国必强，辅隙则国必弱。 

	now the general is the bulwark of the state; if the bulwark is complete at all points; the state will be strong; if the bulwark is defective, the state will be weak. 



	故君之所以患于军者三： 

	there are three ways in which a ruler can bring misfortune upon his army:-- 



	(1) 不知军之不可以进而谓之进，不知军之不可以退而谓之退，是谓縻军； 

	(1) by commanding the army to advance or to retreat, being ignorant of the fact that it cannot obey. this is called hobbling the army. 



	(2) 不知三军之事而同三军之政，则军士惑矣； 

	(2) by attempting to govern an army in the same way as he administers a kingdom, being ignorant of the conditions which obtain in an army. this causes restlessness in the soldier&#39;s minds. 



	(3)不知三军之权而同三军之任，则军士疑矣。 

	(3) by employing the officers of his army without discrimination, through ignorance of the military principle of adaptation to circumstances. this shakes the confidence of the soldiers. 



	三军既惑且疑，则诸侯之难至矣。是谓乱军引胜。 

	but when the army is restless and distrustful, trouble is sure to come from the other feudal princes. this is simply bringing anarchy into the army, and flinging victory away. 



	故知胜有五：知可以战与不可以战者胜，识众寡之用者胜，上下同欲者胜，以虞待不虞者胜，将能而君不御者胜。此五者，知胜之道也。 

	thus we may know that there are five essentials for victory: (1) he will win who knows when to fight and when not to fight. (2) he will win who knows how to handle both superior and inferior forces. (3) he will win whose army is animated by the same spirit throughout all its ranks. (4) he will win who, prepared himself, waits to take the enemy unprepared. (5) he will win who has military capacity and is not interfered with by the sovereign. 



	故曰：知己知彼，百战不贻；不知彼而知己，一胜一负；不知彼不知己，每战必败。 

	hence the saying: if you know the enemy and know yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred battles. if you know yourself but not the enemy, for every victory gained you will also suffer a defeat. if you know neither the enemy nor yourself, you will succumb in every battle. 



	【注：】①：［车贲］。②：“温”字“氵”旁换“车”旁。






军形第四  IV. Tactical Dispositions

下*书 网

	孙子曰：昔之善战者，先为不可胜，以待敌之可胜。 

	sun tzu said: the good fighters of old first put themselves beyond the possibility of defeat, and then waited for an opportunity of defeating the enemy. 



	不可胜在己，可胜在敌。 

	to secure ourselves against defeat lies in our own hands, but the opportunity of defeating the enemy is provided by the enemy himself. 



	故善战者，能为不可胜，不能使敌之必可胜。 

	thus the good fighter is able to secure himself against defeat, but cannot make certain of defeating the enemy. 



	故曰：胜可知，而不可为。 

	hence the saying: one may know how to conquer without being able to do it. 



	不可胜者，守也；可胜者，攻也。 

	security against defeat implies defensive tactics; ability to defeat the enemy means taking the offensive. 



	守则不足，攻则有余。 

	standing on the defensive indicates insufficient strength; attacking, a superabundance of strength. 



	善守者藏于九地之下，善攻者动于九天之上，故能自保而全胜也。 

	the general who is skilled in defense hides in the most secret recesses of the earth; he who is skilled in attack flashes forth from the topmost heights of heaven. thus on the one hand we have ability to protect ourselves; on the other, a victory that is complete. 



	见胜不过众人之所知，非善之善者也； 

	to see victory only when it is within the ken of the common herd is not the acme of excellence. 



	战胜而天下曰善，非善之善者也。 

	neither is it the acme of excellence if you fight and conquer and the whole empire says, "well done!" 



	故举秋毫不为多力，见日月不为明目，闻雷霆不为聪耳。 

	to lift an autumn hair is no sign of great strength; to see the sun and moon is no sign of sharp sight; to hear the noise of thunder is no sign of a quick ear. 



	古之所谓善战者，胜于易胜者也。 

	what the ancients called a clever fighter is one who not only wins, but excels in winning with ease. 



	故善战者之胜也，无智名，无勇功， 

	hence his victories bring him neither reputation for wisdom nor credit for courage. 



	故其战胜不忒。不忒者，其所措胜，胜已败者也。 

	he wins his battles by making no mistakes. making no mistakes is what establishes the certainty of victory, for it means conquering an enemy that is already defeated. 



	故善战者，立于不败之地，而不失敌之败也。 

	hence the skillful fighter puts himself into a position which makes defeat impossible, and does not miss the moment for defeating the enemy. 



	是故胜兵先胜而后求战，败兵先战而后求胜。 

	thus it is that in war the victorious strategist only seeks battle after the victory has been won, whereas he who is destined to defeat first fights and afterwards looks for victory.


	善用兵者，修道而保法，故能为胜败之政。 

	the consummate leader cultivates the moral law, and strictly adheres to method and discipline; thus it is in his power to control success. 



	兵法：一曰度，二曰量，三曰数，四曰称，五曰胜。 

	in respect of military method, we have, firstly, measurement; secondly, estimation of quantity; thirdly, calculation; fourthly, balancing of chances; fifthly, victory. 



	地生度，度生量，量生数，数生称，称生胜。 

	measurement owes its existence to earth; estimation of quantity to measurement; calculation to estimation of quantity; balancing of chances to calculation; and victory to balancing of chances. 



	故胜兵若以镒称铢，败兵若以铢称镒。 

	a victorious army opposed to a routed one, is as a pound&#39;s weight placed in the scale against a single grain. 



	称胜者之战民也，若决积水于千仞之溪者，形也。 

	the onrush of a conquering force is like the bursting of pent-up waters into a chasm a thousand fathoms deep.






兵势第五 V. Energy



	孙子曰：凡治众如治寡，分数是也； 

	sun tzu said: the control of a large force is the same principle as the control of a few men: it is merely a question of dividing up their numbers. 



	斗众如斗寡，形名是也； 

	fighting with a large army under your command is nowise different from fighting with a small one: it is merely a question of instituting signs and signals. 



	三军之众，可使必受敌而无败者，奇正是也； 

	to ensure that your whole host may withstand the brunt of the enemy&#39;s attack and remain unshaken-- this is effected by maneuvers direct and indirect. 



	兵之所加，如以□①投卵者，虚实是也。 

	that the impact of your army may be like a grindstone dashed against an egg--this is effected by the science of weak points and strong. 



	凡战者，以正合，以奇胜。 

	in all fighting, the direct method may be used for joining battle, but indirect methods will be needed in order to secure victory. 



	故善出奇者，无穷如天地，不竭如江海。终而复始，日月是也。死而更生，四时是也。 

	indirect tactics, efficiently applied, are inexhaustible as heaven and earth, unending as the flow of rivers and streams; like the sun and moon, they end but to begin anew; like the four seasons, they pass away to return once more. 



	声不过五，五声之变，不可胜听也； 

	there are not more than five musical notes, yet the combinations of these five give rise to more melodies than can ever be heard. 



	色不过五，五色之变，不可胜观也； 

	there are not more than five primary colors (blue, yellow, red, white, and black), yet in combination they produce more hues than can ever been seen. 



	味不过五，五味之变，不可胜尝也； 

	there are not more than five cardinal tastes (sour, acrid, salt, sweet, bitter), yet combinations of them yield more flavors than can ever be tasted. 



	战势不过奇正，奇正之变，不可胜穷也。 

	in battle, there are not more than two methods of attack--the direct and the indirect; yet these two in combination give rise to an endless series of maneuvers. 



	奇正相生，如循环之无端，孰能穷之哉！ 

	the direct and the indirect lead on to each other in turn. it is like moving in a circle--you never come to an end. who can exhaust the possibilities of their combination? 



	激水之疾，至于漂石者，势也； 

	the onset of troops is like the rush of a torrent which will even roll stones along in its course. 



	鸷鸟之疾，至于毁折者，节也。 

	the quality of decision is like the well-timed swoop of a falcon which enables it to strike and destroy its victim. 



	故善战者，其势险，其节短。 

	therefore the good fighter will be terrible in his onset, and prompt in his decision. 



	势如扩弩，节如发机。 

	energy may be likened to the bending of a crossbow; decision, to the releasing of a trigger. 



	纷纷纭纭，斗乱而不可乱；浑浑沌沌，形圆而不可败。 

	amid the turmoil and tumult of battle, there may be seeming disorder and yet no real disorder at all; amid confusion and chaos, your array may be without head or tail, yet it will be proof against defeat. 



	乱生于治，怯生于勇，弱生于强。 

	simulated disorder postulates perfect discipline, simulated fear postulates courage; simulated weakness postulates strength. 



	治乱，数也；勇怯，势也；强弱，形也。 

	hiding order beneath the cloak of disorder is simply a question of subdivision; concealing courage under a show of timidity presupposes a fund of latent energy; masking strength with weakness is to be effected by tactical dispositions. 



	故善动敌者，形之，敌必从之；予之，敌必取之。 

	thus one who is skillful at keeping the enemy on the move maintains deceitful appearances, according to which the enemy will act. he sacrifices something, that the enemy may snatch at it. 



	以利动之，以卒待之。 

	by holding out baits, he keeps him on the march; then with a body of picked men he lies in wait for him. 



	故善战者，求之于势，不责于人故能择人而任势。 

	the clever combatant looks to the effect of combined energy, and does not require too much from individuals. hence his ability to pick out the right men and utilize combined energy. 



	任势者，其战人也，如转木石。木石之性，安则静，危则动，方则止，圆则行。 

	when he utilizes combined energy, his fighting men become as it were like unto rolling logs or stones. for it is the nature of a log or stone to remain motionless on level ground, and to move when on a slope; if four-cornered, to come to a standstill, but if round-shaped, to go rolling down. 



	故善战人之势，如转圆石于千仞之山者，势也。 

	thus the energy developed by good fighting men is as the momentum of a round stone rolled down a mountain thousands of feet in height. so much on the subject of energy. 



	【注：】①：“瑕”的“王”旁换“石”旁。






虚实第六  VI. Weak Points and Strong

   www.ｌzuoＷen．Ｃom

	孙子曰：凡先处战地而待敌者佚，后处战地而趋战者劳。 

	sun tzu said: whoever is first in the field and awaits the coming of the enemy, will be fresh for the fight; whoever is second in the field and has to hasten to battle will arrive exhausted. 



	故善战者，致人而不致于人。 

	therefore the clever combatant imposes his will on the enemy, but does not allow the enemy&#39;s will to be imposed on him. 



	能使敌人自至者，利之也；能使敌人不得至者，害之也。 

	by holding out advantages to him, he can cause the enemy to approach of his own accord; or, by inflicting damage, he can make it impossible for the enemy to draw near. 



	故敌佚能劳之，饱能饥之，安能动之。 

	if the enemy is taking his ease, he can harass him; if well supplied with food, he can starve him out; if quietly encamped, he can force him to move. 



	出其所必趋，趋其所不意。 

	appear at points which the enemy must hasten to defend; march swiftly to places where you are not expected. 



	行千里而不劳者，行于无人之地也； 

	an army may march great distances without distress, if it marches through country where the enemy is not. 



	攻而必取者，攻其所不守也。守而必固者，守其所必攻也。 

	you can be sure of succeeding in your attacks if you only attack places which are undefended. you can ensure the safety of your defense if you only hold positions that cannot be attacked. 



	故善攻者，敌不知其所守；善守者，敌不知其所攻。 

	hence that general is skillful in attack whose opponent does not know what to defend; and he is skillful in defense whose opponent does not know what to attack. 



	

	微乎微乎，至于无形；神乎神乎，至于无声，故能为敌之司命。 

	o divine art of subtlety and secrecy! through you we learn to be invisible, through you inaudible; and hence we can hold the enemy&#39;s fate in our hands. 



	进而不可御者，冲其虚也；退而不可追者，速而不可及也。 

	you may advance and be absolutely irresistible, if you make for the enemy&#39;s weak points; you may retire and be safe from pursuit if your movements are more rapid than those of the enemy. 



	故我欲战，敌虽高垒深沟，不得不与我战者，攻其所必救也； 

	if we wish to fight, the enemy can be forced to an engagement even though he be sheltered behind a high rampart and a deep ditch. all we need do is attack some other place that he will be obliged to relieve. 



	我不欲战，虽画地而守之，敌不得与我战者，乖其所之也。 

	if we do not wish to fight, we can prevent the enemy from engaging us even though the lines of our encampment be merely traced out on the ground. all we need do is to throw something odd and unaccountable in his way. 



	故形人而我无形，则我专而敌分。 

	by discovering the enemy&#39;s dispositions and remaining invisible ourselves, we can keep our forces concentrated, while the enemy&#39;s must be divided. 



	我专为一，敌分为十，是以十攻其一也。 

	we can form a single united body, while the enemy must split up into fractions. hence there will be a whole pitted against separate parts of a whole, which means that we shall be many to the enemy&#39;s few. 



	则我众敌寡，能以众击寡者，则吾之所与战者约矣。 

	and if we are able thus to attack an inferior force with a superior one, our opponents will be in dire straits. 



	吾所与战之地不可知，不可知则敌所备者多，敌所备者多，则吾所与战者寡矣。 

	the spot where we intend to fight must not be made known; for then the enemy will have to prepare against a possible attack at several different points; and his forces being thus distributed in many directions, the numbers we shall have to face at any given point will be proportionately few. 



	故备前则后寡，备后则前寡，备左则右寡，备右则左寡，无所不备，则无所不寡。 

	for should the enemy strengthen his van, he will weaken his rear; should he strengthen his rear, he will weaken his van; should he strengthen his left, he will weaken his right; should he strengthen his right, he will weaken his left. if he sends reinforcements everywhere, he will everywhere be weak. 



	寡者，备人者也；众者，使人备己者也。 

	numerical weakness comes from having to prepare against possible attacks; numerical strength, from compelling our adversary to make these preparations against us. 



	故知战之地，知战之日，则可千里而会战； 

	knowing the place and the time of the coming battle, we may concentrate from the greatest distances in order to fight. 



	不知战之地，不知战日，则左不能救右，右不能救左，前不能救后，后不能救前，而况远者数十里，近者数里乎！ 

	but if neither time nor place be known, then the left wing will be impotent to succor the right, the right equally impotent to succor the left, the van unable to relieve the rear, or the rear to support the van. how much more so if the furthest portions of the army are anything under a hundred li apart, and even the nearest are separated by several li! 



	以吾度之，越人之兵虽多，亦奚益于胜哉！故曰：胜可为也。 

	though according to my estimate the soldiers of yueh exceed our own in number, that shall advantage them nothing in the matter of victory. i say then that victory can be achieved. 



	敌虽众，可使无斗。故策之而知得失之计， 

	though the enemy be stronger in numbers, we may prevent him from fighting. scheme so as to discover his plans and the likelihood of their success. 



	候之而知动静之理，形之而知死生之地， 

	rouse him, and learn the principle of his activity or inactivity. force him to reveal himself, so as to find out his vulnerable spots. 



	角之而知有余不足之处。 

	carefully compare the opposing army with your own, so that you may know where strength is superabundant and where it is deficient. 



	故形兵之极，至于无形。无形则深间不能窥，智者不能谋。 

	in making tactical dispositions, the highest pitch you can attain is to conceal them; conceal your dispositions, and you will be safe from the prying of the subtlest spies, from the machinations of the wisest brains. 



	因形而措胜于众，众不能知。 

	how victory may be produced for them out of the enemy&#39;s own tactics--that is what the multitude cannot comprehend. 



	人皆知我所以胜之形，而莫知吾所以制胜之形。 

	all men can see the tactics whereby i conquer, but what none can see is the strategy out of which victory is evolved. 



	故其战胜不复，而应形于无穷。 

	do not repeat the tactics which have gained you one victory, but let your methods be regulated by the infinite variety of circumstances. 



	夫兵形象水，水之行避高而趋下， 

	military tactics are like unto water; for water in its natural course runs away from high places and hastens downwards. 



	兵之形避实而击虚； 

	so in war, the way is to avoid what is strong and to strike at what is weak. 



	水因地而制流，兵因敌而制胜。 

	water shapes its course according to the nature of the ground over which it flows; the soldier works out his victory in relation to the foe whom he is facing. 



	故兵无常势，水无常形。 

	therefore, just as water retains no constant shape, so in warfare there are no constant conditions. 



	能因敌变化而取胜者，谓之神。 

	he who can modify his tactics in relation to his opponent and thereby succeed in winning, may be called a heaven-born captain. 



	故五行无常胜，四时无常位，日有短长，月有死生。 

	the five elements (water, fire, wood, metal, earth) are not always equally predominant; the four seasons make way for each other in turn. there are short days and long; the moon has its periods of waning and waxing.






军争第七 VII. Maneuvering



	孙子曰：凡用兵之法，将受命于君， 

	sun tzu said: in war, the general receives his commands from the sovereign. 



	合军聚众，交和而舍， 

	having collected an army and concentrated his forces, he must blend and harmonize the different elements thereof before pitching his camp. 



	莫难于军争。军争之难者，以迂为直，以患为利。 

	after that, comes tactical maneuvering, than which there is nothing more difficult. the difficulty of tactical maneuvering consists in turning the devious into the direct, and misfortune into gain. 



	故迂其途，而诱之以利，后人发，先人至，此知迂直之计者也。 

	thus, to take a long and circuitous route, after enticing the enemy out of the way, and though starting after him, to contrive to reach the goal before him, shows knowledge of the artifice of deviation. 



	军争为利，军争为危。 

	maneuvering with an army is advantageous; with an undisciplined multitude, most dangerous. 



	举军而争利则不及，委军而争利则辎重捐。 

	if you set a fully equipped army in march in order to snatch an advantage, the chances are that you will be too late. on the other hand, to detach a flying column for the purpose involves the sacrifice of its baggage and stores. 



	是故卷甲而趋，日夜不处，倍道兼行，百里而争利，则擒三将军， 

	thus, if you order your men to roll up their buff-coats, and make forced marches without halting day or night, covering double the usual distance at a stretch, doing a hundred li in order to wrest an advantage, the leaders of all your three divisions will fall into the hands of the enemy. 



	劲者先，疲者后，其法十一而至； 

	the stronger men will be in front, the jaded ones will fall behind, and on this plan only one-tenth of your army will reach its destination. 



	五十里而争利，则蹶上将军，其法半至； 

	if you march fifty li in order to outmaneuver the enemy, you will lose the leader of your first division, and only half your force will reach the goal. 



	三十里而争利，则三分之二至。 

	if you march thirty li with the same object, two-thirds of your army will arrive. 



	是故军无辎重则亡，无粮食则亡，无委积则亡。 

	we may take it then that an army without its baggage-train is lost; without provisions it is lost; without bases of supply it is lost. 



	故不知诸侯之谋者，不能豫交； 

	we cannot enter into alliances until we are acquainted with the designs of our neighbors. 



	不知山林、险阻、沮泽之形者，不能行军； 

	we are not fit to lead an army on the march unless we are familiar with the face of the country--its mountains and forests, its pitfalls and precipices, its marshes and swamps. 



	不用乡导者，不能得地利。 

	we shall be unable to turn natural advantage to account unless we make use of local guides. 



	故兵以诈立，以利动， 

	in war, practice dissimulation, and you will succeed. 



	以分和为变者也。 

	whether to concentrate or to divide your troops, must be decided by circumstances. 



	故其疾如风，其徐如林， 

	let your rapidity be that of the wind, your compactness that of the forest.


	侵掠如火，不动如山， 

	in raiding and plundering be like fire, is immovability like a mountain. 



	难知如阴，动如雷震。 

	let your plans be dark and impenetrable as night, and when you move, fall like a thunderbolt. 



	掠乡分众，廓地分利， 

	when you plunder a countryside, let the spoil be divided amongst your men; when you capture new territory, cut it up into allotments for the benefit of the soldiery. 



	悬权而动。 

	ponder and deliberate before you make a move. 



	先知迂直之计者胜，此军争之法也。 

	he will conquer who has learnt the artifice of deviation. such is the art of maneuvering. 



	《军政》曰：“言不相闻，故为之金鼓；视不相见，故为之旌旗。” 

	the book of army management says: on the field of battle, the spoken word does not carry far enough: hence the institution of gongs and drums. nor can ordinary objects be seen clearly enough: hence the institution of banners and flags. 



	夫金鼓旌旗者，所以一民之耳目也。 

	gongs and drums, banners and flags, are means whereby the ears and eyes of the host may be focused on one particular point. 



	民既专一，则勇者不得独进，怯者不得独退，此用众之法也。 

	the host thus forming a single united body, is it impossible either for the brave to advance alone, or for the cowardly to retreat alone. this is the art of handling large masses of men. 



	故夜战多金鼓，昼战多旌旗，所以变人之耳目也。 

	in night-fighting, then, make much use of signal-fires and drums, and in fighting by day, of flags and banners, as a means of influencing the ears and eyes of your army. 



	三军可夺气，将军可夺心。 

	a whole army may be robbed of its spirit; a commander-in-chief may be robbed of his presence of mind. 



	是故朝气锐，昼气惰，暮气归。 

	now a soldier&#39;s spirit is keenest in the morning; by noonday it has begun to flag; and in the evening, his mind is bent only on returning to camp. 



	善用兵者，避其锐气，击其惰归，此治气者也。 

	a clever general, therefore, avoids an army when its spirit is keen, but attacks it when it is sluggish and inclined to return. this is the art of studying moods. 



	以治待乱，以静待哗，此治心者也。 

	disciplined and calm, to await the appearance of disorder and hubbub amongst the enemy:--this is the art of retaining self-possession. 



	以近待远，以佚待劳，以饱待饥，此治力者也。 

	to be near the goal while the enemy is still far from it, to wait at ease while the enemy is toiling and struggling, to be well-fed while the enemy is famished:--this is the art of husbanding one&#39;s strength. 



	无邀正正之旗，无击堂堂之陈，此治变者也。 

	to refrain from intercepting an enemy whose banners are in perfect order, to refrain from attacking an army drawn up in calm and confident array:--this is the art of studying circumstances. 



	故用兵之法，高陵勿向，背丘勿逆， 

	it is a military axiom not to advance uphill against the enemy, nor to oppose him when he comes downhill. 



	佯北勿从，锐卒勿攻， 

	do not pursue an enemy who simulates flight; do not attack soldiers whose temper is keen. 



	饵兵勿食，归师勿遏， 

	do not swallow bait offered by the enemy. do not interfere with an army that is returning home. 



	围师遗阙，穷寇勿迫， 

	when you surround an army, leave an outlet free. do not press a desperate foe too hard. 



	此用兵之法也。 

	such is the art of warfare.






九变第八 VIII. Variation in Tactics

wwＷ、xiＡbook.cＯm

	孙子曰：凡用兵之法，将受命于君，合军聚合。 

	sun tzu said: in war, the general receives his commands from the sovereign, collects his army and concentrates his forces 



	泛地无舍，衢地合交，绝地无留，围地则谋，死地则战， 

	when in difficult country, do not encamp. in country where high roads intersect, join hands with your allies. do not linger in dangerously isolated positions. in hemmed-in situations, you must resort to stratagem. in desperate position, you must fight. 



	途有所不由，军有所不击，城有所不攻，地有所不争，君命有所不受。 

	there are roads which must not be followed, armies which must be not attacked, towns which must be besieged, positions which must not be contested, commands of the sovereign which must not be obeyed. 



	故将通于九变之利者，知用兵矣； 

	the general who thoroughly understands the advantages that accompany variation of tactics knows how to handle his troops. 



	将不通九变之利，虽知地形，不能得地之利矣； 

	the general who does not understand these, may be well acquainted with the configuration of the country, yet he will not be able to turn his knowledge to practical account. 



	治兵不知九变之术，虽知五利，不能得人之用矣。 

	so, the student of war who is unversed in the art of war of varying his plans, even though he be acquainted with the five advantages, will fail to make the best use of his men. 



	是故智者之虑，必杂于利害， 

	hence in the wise leader&#39;s plans, considerations of advantage and of disadvantage will be blended together. 



	杂于利而务可信也， 

	if our expectation of advantage be tempered in this way, we may succeed in accomplishing the essential part of our schemes. 



	杂于害而患可解也。 

	if, on the other hand, in the midst of difficulties we are always ready to seize an advantage, we may extricate ourselves from misfortune. 



	是故屈诸侯者以害，役诸侯者以业，趋诸侯者以利。 

	reduce the hostile chiefs by inflicting damage on them; and make trouble for them, and keep them constantly engaged; hold out specious allurements, and make them rush to any given point. 



	故用兵之法，无恃其不来，恃吾有以待之；无恃其不攻，恃吾有所不可攻也。 

	the art of war teaches us to rely not on the likelihood of the enemy&#39;s not coming, but on our own readiness to receive him; not on the chance of his not attacking, but rather on the fact that we have made our position unassailable. 



	故将有五危，必死可杀，必生可虏，忿速可侮，廉洁可辱，爱民可烦。 

	there are five dangerous faults which may affect a general: (1) recklessness, which leads to destruction; (2) cowardice, which leads to capture; (3) a hasty temper, which can be provoked by insults; (4) a delicacy of honor which is sensitive to shame; (5) over-solicitude for his men, which exposes him to worry and trouble. 



	凡此五者，将之过也，用兵之灾也。 

	these are the five besetting sins of a general, ruinous to the conduct of war. 



	覆军杀将，必以五危，不可不察也。 

	when an army is overthrown and its leader slain, the cause will surely be found among these five dangerous faults. let them be a subject of meditation.






行军第九 IX. The Army on the March

下 ?^书? 网

	孙子曰：凡处军相敌，绝山依谷， 

	sun tzu said: we come now to the question of encamping the army, and observing signs of the enemy. pass quickly over mountains, and keep in the neighborhood of valleys. 



	视生处高，战隆无登，此处山之军也。 

	camp in high places, facing the sun. do not climb heights in order to fight. so much for mountain warfare. 



	绝水必远水， 

	after crossing a river, you should get far away from it. 



	客绝水而来，勿迎之于水内，令半渡而击之利， 

	when an invading force crosses a river in its onward march, do not advance to meet it in mid-stream. it will be best to let half the army get across, and then deliver your attack. 



	欲战者，无附于水而迎客， 

	if you are anxious to fight, you should not go to meet the invader near a river which he has to cross. 



	视生处高，无迎水流，此处水上之军也。 

	moor your craft higher up than the enemy, and facing the sun. do not move up-stream to meet the enemy. so much for river warfare. 



	绝斥泽，唯亟去无留， 

	in crossing salt-marshes, your sole concern should be to get over them quickly, without any delay. 



	若交军于斥泽之中，必依水草而背众树，此处斥泽之军也。 

	if forced to fight in a salt-marsh, you should have water and grass near you, and get your back to a clump of trees. so much for operations in salt-marches. 



	平陆处易，右背高，前死后生，此处平陆之军也。 

	in dry, level country, take up an easily accessible position with rising ground to your right and on your rear, so that the danger may be in front, and safety lie behind. so much for campaigning in flat country. 



	凡此四军之利，黄帝之所以胜四帝也。 

	these are the four useful branches of military knowledge which enabled the yellow emperor to vanquish four several sovereigns. 



	凡军好高而恶下，贵阳而贱阴， 

	all armies prefer high ground to low and sunny places to dark. 



	养生而处实，军无百疾，是谓必胜。 

	if you are careful of your men, and camp on hard ground, the army will be free from disease of every kind, and this will spell victory. 



	丘陵堤防，必处其阳而右背之，此兵之利，地之助也。 

	when you come to a hill or a bank, occupy the sunny side, with the slope on your right rear. thus you will at once act for the benefit of your soldiers and utilize the natural advantages of the ground. 



	上雨水流至，欲涉者，待其定也。 

	when, in consequence of heavy rains up-country, a river which you wish to ford is swollen and flecked with foam, you must wait until it subsides. 



	凡地有绝涧、天井、天牢、天罗、天陷、天隙，必亟去之，勿近也。 

	country in which there are precipitous cliffs with torrents running between, deep natural hollows, confined places, tangled thickets, quagmires and crevasses, should be left with all possible speed and not approached. 



	吾远之，敌近之；吾迎之，敌背之。 

	while we keep away from such places, we should get the enemy to approach them; while we face them, we should let the enemy have them on his rear. 



	军旁有险阻、潢井、蒹葭、小林、□①荟者，必谨覆索之，此伏奸之所处也。 

	if in the neighborhood of your camp there should be any hilly country, ponds surrounded by aquatic grass, hollow basins filled with reeds, or woods with thick undergrowth, they must be carefully routed out and searched; for these are places where men in ambush or insidious spies are likely to be lurking. 



	敌近而静者，恃其险也； 

	when the enemy is close at hand and remains quiet, he is relying on the natural strength of his position. 



	远而挑战者，欲人之进也； 

	when he keeps aloof and tries to provoke a battle, he is anxious for the other side to advance. 



	其所居易者，利也； 

	if his place of encampment is easy of access, he is tendering a bait. 



	众树动者，来也；众草多障者，疑也； 

	movement amongst the trees of a forest shows that the enemy is advancing. the appearance of a number of screens in the midst of thick grass means that the enemy wants to make us suspicious. 



	鸟起者，伏也；兽骇者，覆也； 

	the rising of birds in their flight is the sign of an ambuscade. startled beasts indicate that a sudden attack is coming. 



	尘高而锐者，车来也；卑而广者，徒来也；散而条达者，樵采也；少而往来者，营军也； 

	when there is dust rising in a high column, it is the sign of chariots advancing; when the dust is low, but spread over a wide area, it betokens the approach of infantry. when it branches out in different directions, it shows that parties have been sent to collect firewood. a few clouds of dust moving to and fro signify that the army is encamping.


	辞卑而备者，进也；辞强而进驱者，退也； 

	humble words and increased preparations are signs that the enemy is about to advance. violent language and driving forward as if to the attack are signs that he will retreat. 



	轻车先出居其侧者，陈也； 

	when the light chariots come out first and take up a position on the wings, it is a sign that the enemy is forming for battle. 



	无约而请和者，谋也； 

	peace proposals unaccompanied by a sworn covenant indicate a plot. 



	奔走而陈兵者，期也； 

	when there is much running about and the soldiers fall into rank, it means that the critical moment has come. 



	半进半退者，诱也； 

	when some are seen advancing and some retreating, it is a lure. 



	杖而立者，饥也； 

	when the soldiers stand leaning on their spears, they are faint from want of food. 



	汲而先饮者，渴也； 

	if those who are sent to draw water begin by drinking themselves, the army is suffering from thirst. 



	见利而不进者，劳也； 

	if the enemy sees an advantage to be gained and makes no effort to secure it, the soldiers are exhausted. 



	鸟集者，虚也；夜呼者，恐也； 

	if birds gather on any spot, it is unoccupied. clamor by night betokens nervousness. 



	军扰者，将不重也；旌旗动者，乱也；吏怒者，倦也； 

	if there is disturbance in the camp, the general&#39;s authority is weak. if the banners and flags are shifted about, sedition is afoot. if the officers are angry, it means that the men are weary. 



	杀马肉食者，军无粮也；悬□②不返其舍者，穷寇也； 

	when an army feeds its horses with grain and kills its cattle for food, and when the men do not hang their cooking-pots over the camp-fires, showing that they will not return to their tents, you may know that they are determined to fight to the death. 



	谆谆□③□③，徐与人言者，失众也； 

	the sight of men whispering together in small knots or speaking in subdued tones points to disaffection amongst the rank and file. 



	数赏者，窘也；数罚者，困也； 

	too frequent rewards signify that the enemy is at the end of his resources; too many punishments betray a condition of dire distress. 



	先暴而后畏其众者，不精之至也； 

	to begin by bluster, but afterwards to take fright at the enemy&#39;s numbers, shows a supreme lack of intelligence. 



	来委谢者，欲休息也。 

	when envoys are sent with compliments in their mouths, it is a sign that the enemy wishes for a truce. 



	兵怒而相迎，久而不合，又不相去，必谨察之。 

	if the enemy&#39;s troops march up angrily and remain facing ours for a long time without either joining battle or taking themselves off again, the situation is one that demands great vigilance and circumspection. 



	兵非贵益多也，惟无武进，足以并力料敌取人而已。 

	if our troops are no more in number than the enemy, that is amply sufficient; it only means that no direct attack can be made. what we can do is simply to concentrate all our available strength, keep a close watch on the enemy, and obtain reinforcements. 



	夫惟无虑而易敌者，必擒于人。 

	he who exercises no forethought but makes light of his opponents is sure to be captured by them. 



	卒未亲而罚之，则不服，不服则难用。卒已亲附而罚不行，则不可用。 

	if soldiers are punished before they have grown attached to you, they will not prove submissive; and, unless submissive, then will be practically useless. if, when the soldiers have become attached to you, punishments are not enforced, they will still be unless. 



	故合之以文，齐之以武，是谓必取。 

	therefore soldiers must be treated in the first instance with humanity, but kept under control by means of iron discipline. this is a certain road to victory. 



	令素行以教其民，则民服；令素不行以教其民，则民不服。 

	if in training soldiers commands are habitually enforced, the army will be well-disciplined; if not, its discipline will be bad. 



	令素行者，与众相得也。 

	if a general shows confidence in his men but always insists on his orders being obeyed, the gain will be mutual. 



	【注：】①：“翳”加“艹”头。②：［垂瓦］。③：［讠翕］。






地形第十 X. Terrain

^

	 



	孙子曰：地形有通者、有挂者、有支者、有隘者、有险者、有远者。 

	sun tzu said: we may distinguish six kinds of terrain, to wit: (1) accessible ground; (2) entangling ground; (3) temporizing ground; (4) narrow passes; (5) precipitous heights; (6) positions at a great distance from the enemy. 



	我可以往，彼可以来，曰通。 

	ground which can be freely traversed by both sides is called accessible. 



	通形者，先居高阳，利粮道，以战则利。 

	with regard to ground of this nature, be before the enemy in occupying the raised and sunny spots, and carefully guard your line of supplies. then you will be able to fight with advantage. 



	可以往，难以返，曰挂。 

	ground which can be abandoned but is hard to re-occupy is called entangling. 



	挂形者，敌无备，出而胜之，敌若有备，出而不胜，难以返，不利。 

	from a position of this sort, if the enemy is unprepared, you may sally forth and defeat him. but if the enemy is prepared for your coming, and you fail to defeat him, then, return being impossible, disaster will ensue. 



	我出而不利，彼出而不利，曰支。 

	when the position is such that neither side will gain by making the first move, it is called temporizing ground. 



	支形者，敌虽利我，我无出也，引而去之，令敌半出而击之利。 

	in a position of this sort, even though the enemy should offer us an attractive bait, it will be advisable not to stir forth, but rather to retreat, thus enticing the enemy in his turn; then, when part of his army has come out, we may deliver our attack with advantage. 



	隘形者，我先居之，必盈之以待敌。 

	with regard to narrow passes, if you can occupy them first, let them be strongly garrisoned and await the advent of the enemy. 



	若敌先居之，盈而勿从，不盈而从之。 

	should the army forestall you in occupying a pass, do not go after him if the pass is fully garrisoned, but only if it is weakly garrisoned. 



	险形者，我先居之，必居高阳以待敌； 

	with regard to precipitous heights, if you are beforehand with your adversary, you should occupy the raised and sunny spots, and there wait for him to come up. 



	若敌先居之，引而去之，勿从也。 

	if the enemy has occupied them before you, do not follow him, but retreat and try to entice him away. 



	远形者，势均难以挑战，战而不利。 

	if you are situated at a great distance from the enemy, and the strength of the two armies is equal, it is not easy to provoke a battle, and fighting will be to your disadvantage. 



	凡此六者，地之道也，将之至任，不可不察也。 

	these six are the principles connected with earth. the general who has attained a responsible post must be careful to study them. 



	凡兵有走者、有驰者、有陷者、有崩者、有乱者、有北者。凡此六者，非天地之灾，将之过也。 

	now an army is exposed to six several calamities, not arising from natural causes, but from faults for which the general is responsible. these are: (1) flight; (2) insubordination; (3) collapse; (4) ruin; (5) disorganization; (6) rout. 



	夫势均，以一击十，曰走； 

	other conditions being equal, if one force is hurled against another ten times its size, the result will be the flight of the former. 



	卒强吏弱，曰驰；吏强卒弱，曰陷； 

	when the common soldiers are too strong and their officers too weak, the result is insubordination. when the officers are too strong and the common soldiers too weak, the result is collapse. 



	大吏怒而不服，遇敌怼而自战，将不知其能，曰崩； 

	when the higher officers are angry and insubordinate, and on meeting the enemy give battle on their own account from a feeling of resentment, before the commander-in-chief can tell whether or no he is in a position to fight, the result is ruin. 



	将弱不严，教道不明，吏卒无常，陈兵纵横，曰乱； 

	when the general is weak and without authority; when his orders are not clear and distinct; when there are no fixes duties assigned to officers and men, and the ranks are formed in a slovenly haphazard manner, the result is utter disorganization. 



	将不能料敌，以少合众，以弱击强，兵无选锋，曰北。 

	when a general, unable to estimate the enemy&#39;s strength, allows an inferior force to engage a larger one, or hurls a weak detachment against a powerful one, and neglects to place picked soldiers in the front rank, the result must be rout.


	凡此六者，败之道也，将之至任，不可不察也。 

	these are six ways of courting defeat, which must be carefully noted by the general who has attained a responsible post. 



	夫地形者，兵之助也。料敌制胜，计险隘远近，上将之道也。 

	the natural formation of the country is the soldier&#39;s best ally; but a power of estimating the adversary, of controlling the forces of victory, and of shrewdly calculating difficulties, dangers and distances, constitutes the test of a great general 



	知此而用战者必胜，不知此而用战者必败。 

	he who knows these things, and in fighting puts his knowledge into practice, will win his battles. he who knows them not, nor practices them, will surely be defeated. 



	故战道必胜，主曰无战，必战可也；战道不胜，主曰必战，无战可也。 

	if fighting is sure to result in victory, then you must fight, even though the ruler forbid it; if fighting will not result in victory, then you must not fight even at the ruler&#39;s bidding. 



	故进不求名，退不避罪，唯民是保，而利于主，国之宝也。 

	the general who advances without coveting fame and retreats without fearing disgrace, whose only thought is to protect his country and do good service for his sovereign, is the jewel of the kingdom. 



	视卒如婴儿，故可以与之赴深溪；视卒如爱子，故可与之俱死。 

	regard your soldiers as your children, and they will follow you into the deepest valleys; look upon them as your own beloved sons, and they will stand by you even unto death. 



	厚而不能使，爱而不能令，乱而不能治，譬若骄子，不可用也。 

	if, however, you are indulgent, but unable to make your authority felt; kind-hearted, but unable to enforce your commands; and incapable, moreover, of quelling disorder: then your soldiers must be likened to spoilt children; they are useless for any practical purpose. 



	知吾卒之可以击，而不知敌之不可击，胜之半也； 

	if we know that our own men are in a condition to attack, but are unaware that the enemy is not open to attack, we have gone only halfway towards victory. 



	知敌之可击，而不知吾卒之不可以击，胜之半也； 

	if we know that the enemy is open to attack, but are unaware that our own men are not in a condition to attack, we have gone only halfway towards victory. 

	知敌之可击，知吾卒之可以击，而不知地形之不可以战，胜之半也。 

	if we know that the enemy is open to attack, and also know that our men are in a condition to attack, but are unaware that the nature of the ground makes fighting impracticable, we have still gone only halfway towards victory. 



	故知兵者，动而不迷，举而不穷。 

	hence the experienced soldier, once in motion, is never bewildered; once he has broken camp, he is never at a loss. 



	故曰：知彼知己，胜乃不殆；知天知地，胜乃可全。 

	hence the saying: if you know the enemy and know yourself, your victory will not stand in doubt; if you know heaven and know earth, you may make your victory complete.






九地第十一  XI. The Nine Situations

。下 书网

	孙子曰：用兵之法，有散地，有轻地，有争地，有交地，有衢地，有重地，有泛地，有围地，有 

	死地。 

	sun tzu said: the art of war recognizes nine varieties of ground: (1) dispersive ground; (2) facile ground; (3) contentious ground; (4) open ground; (5) ground of intersecting highways; (6) serious ground; (7) difficult ground; (8) hemmed-in ground; (9) desperate ground. 



	诸侯自战其地者，为散地； 

	when a chieftain is fighting in his own territory, it is dispersive ground. 



	入人之地不深者，为轻地； 

	when he has penetrated into hostile territory, but to no great distance, it is facile ground. 



	我得亦利，彼得亦利者，为争地； 

	ground the possession of which imports great advantage to either side, is contentious ground. 



	我可以往，彼可以来者，为交地； 

	ground on which each side has liberty of movement is open ground. 



	诸侯之地三属，先至而得天下众者，为衢地； 

	ground which forms the key to three contiguous states, so that he who occupies it first has most of the empire at his command, is a ground of intersecting highways. 



	入人之地深，背城邑多者，为重地； 

	when an army has penetrated into the heart of a hostile country, leaving a number of fortified cities in its rear, it is serious ground. 



	山林、险阻、沮泽，凡难行之道者，为泛地； 

	mountain forests, rugged steeps, marshes and fens--all country that is hard to traverse: this is difficult ground. 



	所由入者隘，所从归者迂，彼寡可以击吾之众者，为围地； 

	ground which is reached through narrow gorges, and from which we can only retire by tortuous paths, so that a small number of the enemy would suffice to crush a large body of our men: this is hemmed in ground. 



	疾战则存，不疾战则亡者，为死地。 

	ground on which we can only be saved from destruction by fighting without delay, is desperate ground. 



	是故散地则无战，轻地则无止，争地则无攻， 

	on dispersive ground, therefore, fight not. on facile ground, halt not. on contentious ground, attack not. 



	交地则无绝，衢地则合交， 

	on open ground, do not try to block the enemy&#39;s way. on the ground of intersecting highways, join hands with your allies. 



	重地则掠，泛地则行， 

	on serious ground, gather in plunder. in difficult ground, keep steadily on the march. 



	围地则谋，死地则战。 

	on hemmed-in ground, resort to stratagem. on desperate ground, fight. 



	古之善用兵者，能使敌人前后不相及，众寡不相恃，贵贱不相救，上下不相收， 

	those who were called skillful leaders of old knew how to drive a wedge between the enemy&#39;s front and rear; to prevent co-operation between his large and small divisions; to hinder the good troops from rescuing the bad, the officers from rallying their men. 



	卒离而不集，兵合而不齐。 

	when the enemy&#39;s men were united, they managed to keep them in disorder. 



	合于利而动，不合于利而止。 

	when it was to their advantage, they made a forward move; when otherwise, they stopped still. 



	敢问敌众而整将来，待之若何曰：先夺其所爱则听矣。 

	if asked how to cope with a great host of the enemy in orderly array and on the point of marching to the attack, i should say: "begin by seizing something which your opponent holds dear; then he will be amenable to your will." 



	兵之情主速，乘人之不及。由不虞之道，攻其所不戒也。 

	rapidity is the essence of war: take advantage of the enemy&#39;s unreadiness, make your way by unexpected routes, and attack unguarded spots. 



	凡为客之道，深入则专。主人不克， 

	the following are the principles to be observed by an invading force: the further you penetrate into a country, the greater will be the solidarity of your troops, and thus the defenders will not prevail against you. 



	掠于饶野，三军足食。 

	make forays in fertile country in order to supply your army with food. 



	谨养而勿劳，并气积力，运兵计谋，为不可测。 

	carefully study the well-being of your men, and do not overtax them. concentrate your energy and hoard your strength. keep your army continually on the move, and devise unfathomable plans. 



	投之无所往，死且不北。死焉不得，士人尽力。 

	throw your soldiers into positions whence there is no escape, and they will prefer death to flight. if they will face death, there is nothing they may not achieve. officers and men alike will put forth their uttermost strength. 



	兵士甚陷则不惧，无所往则固，深入则拘，不得已则斗。 

	soldiers when in desperate straits lose the sense of fear. if there is no place of refuge, they will stand firm. if they are in hostile country, they will show a stubborn front. if there is no help for it, they will fight hard. 



	是故其兵不修而戒，不求而得，不约而亲，不令而信， 

	thus, without waiting to be marshaled, the soldiers will be constantly on the qui vive; without waiting to be asked, they will do your will; without restrictions, they will be faithful; without giving orders, they can be trusted. 



	禁祥去疑，至死无所之。 

	prohibit the taking of omens, and do away with superstitious doubts. then, until death itself comes, no calamity need be feared. 



	吾士无余财，非恶货也；无余命，非恶寿也。 

	if our soldiers are not overburdened with money, it is not because they have a distaste for riches; if their lives are not unduly long, it is not because they are disinclined to longevity. 



	令发之日，士卒坐者涕沾襟，偃卧者涕交颐，投之无所往，诸、刿之勇也。






孙子兵法计篇



	孙子曰：兵者，国之大事，死生之地，存亡之道，不可不察也。

	故经之以五事，校之以计而索其情：一曰道，二曰天，三曰地，四曰将，五曰法。道者，令民与上同意也，故可以与之死，可以与之生，而不畏危。天者，阴阳、寒暑、时制也。地者，远近、险易、广狭、死生也。将者，智、信、仁、勇、严也。法者，曲制、官道、主用也。凡此五者，将莫不闻，知之者胜，不知者不胜。

	故校之以计而索其情，曰：主孰有道？将孰有能？天地孰得？法令孰行？兵众孰强？士卒孰练？赏罚孰明？吾以此知胜负矣。

	将听吾计，用之必胜，留之；将不听吾计，用之必败，去之。计利以听，乃为之势，以佐其外。势者，因利而制权也。兵者，诡道也。故能而示之不能，用而示之不用，近而示之远，远而示之近。利而诱之，乱而取之，实而备之，强而避之，怒而挠之，卑而骄之，佚而劳之，亲而离之。攻其无备，出其不意。此兵家之胜，不可先传也。

	夫未战而庙算胜者，得算多也；未战而庙算不胜者，得算少也。多算胜，少算不胜，而况于无算乎！吾以此观之，胜负见矣。






作战篇



	孙子曰：凡用兵之法，驰车千驷，革车千乘，带甲十万，千里馈粮，则内外之费，宾客之用，胶漆之材，车甲之奉，日费千金，然后十万之师举矣。

	其用战也胜，久则钝兵挫锐，攻城则力屈，久暴师则国用不足。夫钝兵挫锐，屈力殚货，则诸侯乘其弊而起，虽有智者，不能善其后矣。故兵闻拙速，未睹巧之久也。夫兵久而国利者，未之有也。故不尽知用兵之害者，则不能尽知用兵之利也。

	善用兵者，役不再籍，粮不三载；取用于国，因粮于敌，故军食可足也。

	国之贫于师者远输，远输则百姓贫；近师者贵卖，贵卖则百姓财竭，财竭则急于丘役。力屈财殚，中原内虚于家。百姓之费，十去其七；公家之费，破车罢马，甲胄矢弩，戟楯蔽橹，丘牛大车，十去其六。

	故智将务食于敌，食敌一钟，当吾二十钟；萁秆一石，当吾二十石。故杀敌者，怒也；取敌之利者，货也。故车战，得车十乘以上，赏其先得者，而更其旌

	旗，车杂而乘之，卒善而养之，是谓胜敌而益强。

	故兵贵胜，不贵久。

	故知兵之将，生民之司命，国家安危之主也。


wwＷ．7wenxue.com



谋攻篇



	孙子曰：凡用兵之法，全国为上，破国次之；全军为上，破军次之；全旅为上，破旅次之；全卒为上，破卒次之；全伍为上；破伍次之。是故百战百胜，非善之善者也；不战而屈人之兵，善之善者也。

	故上兵伐谋，其次伐交，其次伐兵，其下攻城。攻城之法，为不得已，修橹轒辒，具器械，三月而后成，距闉，又三月而后已。将不胜其忿而蚁附之，杀三分之一，而城不拔者，此攻之灾也。

	故善用兵者，屈人之兵而非战也，拔人之城而非攻也，毁人之国而非久也。

	必以全争于天下，故兵不顿而利可全，此谋攻之法也。

	故用兵之法，十则围之，五则攻之，倍则分之，敌则能战之，少则能逃之，不若则能避之。故小敌之坚，大敌之擒也。

	夫将者，国之辅也，辅周则国必强，辅隙则国必弱。

	故君之所以患于军者三：不知军之不可以进，而谓之进；不知军之不可以退，而谓之退，是谓縻军。不知三军之事，而同三军之政者，则军士惑矣。不知三军之权，而同三军之任，则军士疑矣。三军既惑且疑，则诸侯之难至矣，是谓乱军引胜。

	故知胜有五：知可以战与不可以战者胜，识众寡之用者胜，上下同欲者胜，以虞待不虞者胜，将能而君不御者胜。此五者，知胜之道也。

	故曰：知彼知己者，百战不殆；不知彼而知己，一胜一负；不知彼不知己，每战必殆。


www.56ｗeｎ．ＣＯＭ



孙子兵法形篇



	孙子曰：昔之善战者，先为不可胜，以待敌之可胜。不可胜在己，可胜在敌。

	故善战者，能为不可胜，不能使敌之可胜。故曰：胜可知，而不可为。不可胜者，守也；可胜者，攻也。守则不足，攻则有余。善守者，藏于九地之下；善攻者，动于九天之上，故能自保而全胜也。

	见胜不过众人之所知，非善之善者也；战胜而天下曰善，非善之善者也。故举秋毫不为多力，见日月不为明目，闻雷霆不为聪耳。古之所谓善战者，胜于易胜者也。故善战者之胜也，无智名，无勇功，故其战胜不忒。不忒者，其所措必胜，胜已败者也。故善战者，立于不败之地，而不失敌之败也。是故胜兵先胜而后求战，败兵先战而后求胜。善用兵者，修道而保法，故能为胜败之政。

	兵法：一曰度，二曰量，三曰数，四曰称，五曰胜。地生度，度生量，量生数，数生称，称生胜。

	故胜兵若以镒称铢，败兵若以铢称镒。胜者之战民也，若决积水于千仞之谿者，形也。






孙子兵法势篇



	孙子曰：凡治众如治寡，分数是也；斗众如斗寡，形名是也；三军之众，可使必受敌而无败者，奇正是也；兵之所加，如以碫投卵者，虚实是也。

	凡战者，以正合，以奇胜。故善出奇者，无穷如天地，不竭如江河。终而复始，日月是也；死而复生，四时是也。声不过五，五声之变，不可胜听也；色不过五，五色之变，不可胜观也；味不过五，五味之变，不可胜尝也；战势不过奇正，奇正之变，不可胜穷也。奇正相生，如循环之无端，孰能穷之？

	激水之疾，至于漂石者，势也；鸷鸟之疾，至于毁折者，节也。是故善战者，其势险，其节短。势如彍弩，节如发机。纷纷纭纭，斗乱而不可乱也；浑浑沌沌，形圆而不可败也。

	乱生于治，怯生于勇，弱生于强。治乱，数也；勇怯，势也；强弱，形也。

	故善动敌者，形之，敌必从之；予之，敌必取之。以利动之，以卒待之。

	故善战者，求之于势，不责于人，故能择人而任势。任势者，其战人也，如转木石。木石之性，安则静，危则动，方则止，圆则行。故善战人之势，如转圆石于千仞之山者，势也。






虚实篇

下…书 网

	孙子曰：凡先处战地而待敌者佚，后处战地而趋战者劳。故善战者，致人而不致于人。

	能使敌人自至者，利之也；能使敌人不得至者，害之也。故敌佚能劳之，饱能饥之，安能动之。出其所不趋，趋其所不意。行千里而不劳者，行于无人之地也。攻而必取者，攻其所不守也；守而必固者，守其所不攻也。故善攻者，敌不知其所守；善守者，敌不知其所攻。微乎微乎，至于无形；神乎神乎，至于无声，故能为敌之司命。

	进而不可御者，冲其虚也；退而不可追者，速而不可及也。故我欲战，敌虽高垒深沟，不得不与我战者，攻其所必救也；我不欲战，画地而守之，敌不得与我战者，乖其所之也。

	故形人而我无形，则我专而敌分。我专为一，敌分为十，是以十攻其一也，则我众而敌寡。能以众击寡者，则吾之所与战者，约矣。吾所与战之地不可知，不可知，则敌所备者多；敌所备者多，则吾所与战者，寡矣。故备前则后寡，备后则前寡；备左则右寡，备右则左寡；无所不备，则无所不寡。寡者，备人者也；众者，使人备己者也。

	故知战之地，知战之日，则可千里而会战。不知战地，不知战日，则左不能救右，右不能救左，前不能救后，后不能救前，而况远者数十里，近者数里乎？

	以吾度之，越人之兵虽多，亦奚益于胜败哉？故曰：胜可为也。敌虽众，可使无斗。

	故策之而知得失之计，作之而知动静之理，形之而知死生之地，角之而知有馀不足之处。

	故形兵之极，至于无形。无形，则深间不能窥，智者不能谋。因形而错胜于众，众不能知。人皆知我所以胜之形，而莫知吾所以制胜之形。故其战胜不复，而应形于无穷。

	夫兵形象水，水之形，避高而趋下；兵之形，避实而击虚。水因地而制流，兵因敌而制胜。故兵无常势，水无常形，能因敌变化而取胜者，谓之神。故五行无常胜，四时无常位，日有短长，月有死生。






军争篇



	孙子曰：凡用兵之法，将受命于君，合军聚众，交和而舍，莫难于军争。军争之难者，以迂为直，以患为利。故迂其途，而诱之以利，后人发，先人至，此知迂直之计者也。

	故军争为利，军争为危。举军而争利，则不及；委军而争利，则辎重捐。是故卷甲而趋，日夜不处，倍道兼行，百里而争利，则擒三将军。劲者先，疲者后，其法十一而至。五十里而争利，则蹶上将军，其法半至；三十里而争利，则三分之二至。是故军无辎重则亡，无粮食则亡，无委积则亡。

	故不知诸侯之谋者，不能豫交；不知山林、险阻、沮泽之形者，不能行军；不用乡导者，不能得地利。

	故兵以诈立，以利动，以分合为变者也。故其疾如风，其徐如林，侵掠如火，不动如山，难知如阴，动如雷震。掠乡分众，廓地分利，悬权而动。先知迂直之计者胜，此军争之法也。

	《军政》曰：“言不相闻，故为金鼓；视不相见，故为旌旗。”夫金鼓、旌

	旗者，所以一人之耳目也。人既专一，则勇者不得独进，怯者不得独退，此用众之法也。故夜战多金鼓，昼战多旌旗，所以变人之耳目也。

	故三军可夺气，将军可夺心。是故朝气锐，昼气惰，暮气归。故善用兵者，避其锐气，击其惰归，此治气者也。以治待乱，以静待哗，此治心者也。以近待远，以佚待劳，以饱待饥，此治力者也。无邀正正之旗，勿击堂堂之阵，此治变者也。

	故用兵之法：高陵勿向，背丘勿逆，佯北勿从，锐卒勿攻，饵兵勿食，归师勿遏，围师必阙，穷寇勿迫，此用兵之法也。






九变篇

下*书 网

	

	孙子曰：凡用兵之法，将受命于君，合军聚众。圮地无舍，衢地合交，绝地无留，围地则谋，死地则战。

	途有所不由，军有所不击，城有所不攻，地有所不争，君命有所不受。故将通于九变之地利者，知用兵矣。将不通于九变之利，虽知地形，不能得地之利矣。

	治兵不知九变之术，虽知五利，不能得人之用矣。是故智者之虑，必杂于利害。

	杂于利，而务可信也；杂于害，而患可解也。

	是故屈诸侯者以害，役诸侯者以业，趋诸侯者以利。

	故用兵之法，无恃其不来，恃吾有以待也；无恃其不攻，恃吾有所不可攻也。

	故将有五危：必死可杀，必生可虏，忿速可侮，廉洁可辱，爱民可烦。凡此五者，将之过也，用兵之灾也。覆军杀将，必以五危，不可不察也。






行军篇



	孙子曰：凡处军、相敌，绝山依谷，视生处高，战隆无登，此处山之军也。

	绝水必远水，客绝水而来，勿迎之于水内，令半济而击之，利；欲战者，无附于水而迎客；视生处高，无迎水流，此处水上之军也。绝斥泽，惟亟去无留。若交军于斥泽之中，必依水草而背众树，此处斥泽之军也。平陆处易，而右背高，前死后生，此处平陆之军也。凡此四军之利，黄帝之所以胜四帝也。

	凡军好高而恶下，贵阳而贱阴，养生处实，军无百疾，是谓必胜。丘陵堤防，必处其阳，而右背之。此兵之利，地之助也。

	上雨，水沫至，欲涉者，待其定也。

	凡地，有绝涧、天井、天牢、天罗、天陷、天隙，必亟去之，勿近也。吾远之，敌近之；吾迎之，敌背之。

	军行有险阻、潢井、葭苇、山林、翳薈者，必谨覆索之，此伏奸之所处也。

	敌近而静者，恃其险也；远而挑战者，欲人之进也。其所居易者，利也。

	众树动者，来也；众草多障者，疑也；鸟起者，伏也；兽骇者，覆也；尘高而锐者，车来也；卑而广者，徒来也；散而条达者，樵采也；少而往来者，营军也。

	辞卑而益备者，进也；辞彊而进驱者，退也；轻车先出，居其侧者，阵也；无约而请和者，谋也；奔走而陈兵者，期也；半进半退者，诱也。

	杖而立者，饥也；汲而先饮者，渴也；见利而不进者，劳也；鸟集者，虚也；夜呼者，恐也。

	军扰者，将不重也；旌旗动者，乱也；吏怒者，倦也；粟马肉食，军无悬缶；不返其舍者，穷寇也；谆谆翕翕，徐与人言者，失众也；数赏者，窘也；数罚者，困也；先暴而后畏其众者，不精之至也；来委谢者，欲休息也；兵怒而相迎，久而不合，又不相去，必谨察之。

	兵非多益也，惟无武进，足以并力、料敌、取人而已。夫惟无虑而易敌者，必擒于人。

	卒未亲附而罚之，则不服，不服则难用也；卒己亲附而罚不行，则不可用也。

	故令之以文，齐之以武，是谓必取。令素行以教其民，则民服；令不素行以教其民，则民不服。令素行者，与众相得也。






地形篇

下 & 书 & 网

	孙子曰：地形有通者，有挂者，有支者，有隘者，有险者，有远者。我可以往，彼可以来，曰通。通形者，先居高阳，利粮道，以战则利。可以往，难以返，曰挂。挂形者，敌无备，出而胜之；敌若有备，出而不胜，难以返，不利。我出而不利，彼出而不利，曰支。支形者，敌虽利我，我无出也；引而去之，令敌半出而击之，利。隘形者，我先居之，必盈之以待敌；若敌先居之，盈而勿从，不盈而从之。险形者，我先居之，必居高阳以待敌；若敌先居之，引而去之，勿从也。远形者，势均，难以挑战，战而不利。凡此六者，地之道也，将之至任，不可不察也。

	故兵有走者，有弛者，有陷者，有崩者，有乱者，有北者。凡此六者，非天之灾，将之过也。夫势均，以一击十，曰走。卒强吏弱，曰弛。吏强卒弱，曰陷。

	大吏怒而不服，遇敌怼而自战，将不知其能，曰崩。将弱不严，教道不明，吏卒无常，陈兵纵横，曰乱。将不能料敌，以少合众，以弱击强，兵无选锋，曰北。

	凡此六者，败之道也，将之至任，不可不察也。

	夫地形者，兵之助也。料敌制胜，计险厄、远近，上将之道也。知此而用战者必胜，不知此而用战者必败。

	故战道必胜，主曰无战，必战可也；战道不胜，主曰必战，无战可也。故进不求名，退不避罪，唯人是保，而利合于主，国之宝也。

	视卒如婴儿，故可与之赴深谿；视卒如爱子，故可与之俱死。厚而不能使，爱而不能令，乱而不能治，譬若骄子，不可用也。

	知吾卒之可以击，而不知敌之不可击，胜之半也；知敌之可击，而不知吾卒之不可以击，胜之半也；知敌之可击，知吾卒之可以击，而不知地形之不可以战，胜之半也。故知兵者，动而不迷，举而不穷。故曰：知彼知己，胜乃不殆；知天知地，胜乃不穷。


www.56ｗeｎ．ＣＯＭ



九地篇

下{书}网

	孙子曰：用兵之法，有散地，有轻地，有争地，有交地，有衢地，有重地，有圮地，有围地，有死地。诸侯自战其地，为散地；入人之地而不深者，为轻地；我得则利，彼得亦利者，为争地；我可以往，彼可以来者，为交地；诸侯之地三属，先至而得天下之众者，为衢地；入人之地深，背城邑多者，为重地；行山林、险阻、沮泽，凡难行之道者，为圮地；所由入者隘，所从归者迂，彼寡可以击吾之众者，为围地；疾战则存，不疾战则亡者，为死地。

	是故散地则无战，轻地则无止，争地则无攻，交地则无绝，衢地则合交，重地则掠，圮地则行，围地则谋，死地则战。

	所谓古之善用兵者，能使敌人前后不相及，众寡不相恃，贵贱不相救，上下不相收，卒离而不集，兵合而不齐。

	合于利而动，不合于利而止。

	敢问：“敌众整而将来，待之若何？”曰：“先夺其所爱，则听矣。”兵之情主速，乘人之不及，由不虞之道，攻其所不戒也。

	凡为客之道：深入则专，主人不克；掠于饶野，三军足食；谨养而勿劳，并气积力；运兵计谋，为不可测。投之无所往，死且不北。死焉不得，士人尽力。

	兵士甚陷则不惧，无所往则固，深入则拘，不得已则斗。是故其兵不修而戒，不求而得，不约而亲，不令而信，禁祥去疑，至死无所之。吾士无余财，非恶货也；无余命，非恶寿也。令发之日，士卒坐者涕沾襟，偃卧者涕交颐，投之无所往，诸、刿之勇也。

	故善用兵者，譬如率然。率然者，常山之蛇也。击其首则尾至，击其尾则首至，击其中则首尾俱至。敢问：“兵可使如率然乎？”曰：“可。”夫吴人与越人相恶也，当其同舟而济，遇风，其相救也如左右手。是故方马埋轮，未足恃也；齐勇若一，政之道也；刚柔皆得，地之理也。故善用兵者，携手若使一人，不得已也。

	将军之事，静以幽，正以治。能愚士卒之耳目，使之无知；易其事，革其谋，使人无识；易其居，迂其途，使人不得虑。帅与之期，如登高而去其梯；帅与之深入诸侯之地，而发其机，焚舟破釜，若驱群羊，驱而往，驱而来，莫知所之。

	聚三军之众，投之于险，此谓将军之事也。九地之变，屈伸之利，人情之理，不可不察。

	凡为客之道，深则专，浅则散。去国越境而师者，绝地也；四通者，衢地也；入深者，重地也；入浅者，轻地也；背固前隘者，围地也；无所往者，死地也。

	是故散地，吾将一其志；轻地，吾将使之属；争地，吾将趋其后；交地，吾将谨其守；衢地，吾将固其结；重地，吾将继其食；圮地，吾将进其途；围地，吾将塞其阙；死地，吾将示之以不活。

	故兵之情，围则御，不得已则斗，过则从。

	是故不知诸侯之谋者，不能预交；不知山林、险阻、沮泽之形者，不能行军；不用乡导者，不能得地利。四五者不知一，非霸王之兵也。夫霸王之兵，伐大国，则其众不得聚；威加于敌，则其交不得合。是故不争天下之交，不养天下之权，信己之私，威加于敌，故其城可拔，其国可隳。施无法之赏，悬无政之令，犯三军之众，若使一人。犯之以事，勿告以言；犯之以利，勿告以害。投之亡地然后存，陷之死地然后生。夫众陷于害，然后能为胜败。

	故为兵之事，在于顺详敌之意，并敌一向，千里杀将，是谓巧能成事也。

	是故政举之日，夷关折符，无通其使，厉于廊庙之上，以诛其事。敌人开阖，必亟入之。先其所爱，微与之期。践墨随敌，以决战事。是故始如处女，敌人开户；后如脱兔，敌不及拒。






火攻篇



	孙子曰：凡火攻有五，一曰火人，二曰火积，三曰火辎，四曰火库，五曰火队。

	行火必有因，烟火必素具。发火有时，起火有日。时者，天之燥也；日者，月在箕、壁、翼、轸也，凡此四宿者，风起之日也。

	凡火攻，必因五火之变而应之。火发于内，则早应之于外。火发而兵静者，待而勿攻。极其火力，可从而从之，不可从而止。火可发于外，无待于内，以时发之。火发上风，无攻下风。昼风久，夜风止。凡军必知有五火之变，以数守之。

	故以火佐攻者明，以水佐攻者强。水可以绝，不可以夺。

	夫战胜攻取，而不修其功者，凶，命曰“费留”。故曰：明主虑之，良将修之。非利不动，非得不用，非危不战。

	主不可以怒而兴师，将不可以愠而致战。合于利而动，不合于利而止。怒可以复喜，愠可以复悦，亡国不可以复存，死者不可以复生。故明君慎之，良将警之，此安国全军之道也。


wwＷ、xiabook.com



用间篇



	孙子曰：凡兴师十万，出征千里，百姓之费，公家之奉，日费千金；内外骚动，怠于道路，不得操事者七十万家。相守数年，以争一日之胜，而爱爵禄百金，不知敌之情者，不仁之至也，非民之将也，非主之佐也，非胜之主也。故明君贤将，所以动而胜人，成功出于众者，先知也。先知者，不可取于鬼神，不可象于事，不可验于度，必取于人，知敌之情者也。

	故用间有五：有乡间，有内间，有反间，有死间，有生间。五间俱起，莫知其道，是谓神纪，人君之宝也。乡间者，因其乡人而用之；内间者，因其官人而用之；反间者，因其敌间而用之；死间者，为诳事于外，令吾间知之，而传于敌间也；生间者，反报也。

	故三军之事，莫亲于间，赏莫厚于间，事莫密于间。非圣智不能用间，非仁义不能使间，非微妙不能得间之实。微哉微哉，无所不用间也！

	间事未发而先闻者，间与所告者皆死。凡军之所欲击，城之所欲攻，人之所欲杀，必先知其守将、左右、谒者、门者、舍人之姓名，令吾间必索知之。必索敌人之间来间我者，因而利之，导而舍之，故反间可得而用也。因是而知之，故乡间、内间可得而使也；因是而知之，故死间为诳事，可使告敌；因是而知之，故生间可使如期。五间之事，主必知之，知之必在于反间，故反间不可不厚也。

	昔殷之兴也，伊挚在夏；周之兴也，吕牙在殷。故明君贤将，能以上智为间者，必成大功。此兵之要，三军之所恃而动也。






计 篇

下 //书 //网

	孙子曰： 兵者，国之大事，死生之地，存亡之道，不可不察也。故经之以五事，校之以计，而索其情：一曰道，二曰天，三曰地，四曰将，五曰法。道者，令民于上同意，可与之死，可与之生，而不危也；天者，阴阳、寒暑、时制也；地者，远近、险易、广狭、死生也；将者，智、信、仁、勇、严也；法者，曲制、官道、主用也。凡此五者，将莫不闻，知之者胜，不知之者不胜。故校之以计，而索其情，曰：主孰有道？将孰有能？天地孰得？法令孰行？兵众孰强？士卒孰练？赏罚孰明？吾以此知胜负矣。将听吾计，用之必胜，留之；将不听吾计，用之必败，去之。计利以听，乃为之势，以佐其外。势者，因利而制权也。兵者，诡道也。故能而示之不能，用而示之不用，近而示之远，远而示之近。利而诱之，乱而取之，实而备之，强而避之，怒而挠之，卑而骄之，佚而劳之，亲而离之，攻其无备，出其不意。此兵家之胜，不可先传也。夫未战而庙算胜者，得算多也；未战而庙算不胜者，得算少也。多算胜少算， 而况于无算乎！吾以此观之，胜负见矣。

	

	解释： 孙子说：战争是国家的大事，关系到军民的生死，国家的存亡，是不能不认真研究、不慎重考虑的。所以，要用五项决定战争胜败的基本因素为纲要，把敌对双方的优劣条件作比较，来探索战争胜负的情势。这些主要条件是：一政治，二天时，三地利，四将帅，五法制。政治，是讲要使民众和君主的意愿一致，可以叫他们为君主死，为君主生，而赴汤蹈火。天时，是讲昼夜、阴晴、寒冬、酷暑等气候季节情况。地利，是讲远途近路、险要平坦、广阔狭窄、死地生地等地形条件。将帅，是讲才智、诚信、仁慈、勇敢、威严等条件。法制，是讲部队的组织编制、指挥信号的编制、指挥信号的规定，将帅的职责，粮道和军需军械的管理等情况和制度。凡属这五方面情况，将帅都不能不知道。了解这些情况的就能胜利，不了解的就不能胜利。所以，要把对敌对双方优劣条件的估计作比较，来探索战争胜负的情势。要看：哪一方君主的政治开明？哪一方将帅的指挥高明？哪一方天时地利有利？哪一方法令能贯彻执行？哪一方的军事实力比较强大？哪一方的兵卒较有训练？哪一方的赏罚比较严明？我们根据这些，就可以判断谁胜谁败了。为将如果能听从我的讲谋，指挥作战肯定会获得胜利，就留在这里；如果不能听从我的计谋，指挥作战注定要失败，我就不用。经过对利害条件的分析，正确的意见得到采纳，然后就造成有利的态势，作为外地的辅助条件。所谓“势”，就是利用有利的情况，而采取灵活的战术。用兵是一种诡诈的行为。所以，能打，装做不能打；要打,装做不要打。要向近处，装做要向远处；要向远处，装做要向近处。给敌人以小利，去引诱它；迫使敌人混乱，然后攻取它。敌人力量充实，就要防备它；敌人兵力强大，就要避免决战。用挑逗的方法去激怒敌人，使其失去理智；用谦卑的言辞表示自己的弱小，使敌人骄傲。敌人休整得好，要搅得它不得安生，使其疲劳；敌人内部和睦，要设法离间它。攻击敌人无备的地方，出乎敌人意外的行动，这是军事家指挥的微妙，是不能事先呆板规定的。凡是未开战之前预计可以打胜仗的，是因为胜利的条件充分；未开战之前预计不能打胜仗的，是因为胜利的条件不充分；条件充分的能胜利，不充分的不能胜利，何况毫无条件呢？我们根据这些来看，胜败就可以预见了。


www.7wenxue.com



作战篇

下 /书 网

	孙子曰： 凡用兵之法，驰车千驷，革车千乘，带甲十万，千里馈粮。则内外之费，宾客之用，胶漆之材，车甲之奉，日费千金，然后十万之师举矣。其用战也，胜久则钝兵挫锐，攻城则力屈，久暴师则国用不足。夫钝兵挫锐，屈力殚货，则诸侯乘其弊而起，虽有智者不能善其后矣。故兵闻拙速，未睹巧之久也。夫兵久而国利者，未之有也。故不尽知用兵之害者，则不能尽知用兵之利也。善用兵者，役不再籍，粮不三载，取用于国，因粮于敌，故军食可足也。国之贫于师者远输，远输则百姓贫；近师者贵卖，贵卖则百姓财竭，财竭则急于丘役。力屈中原、内虚于家，百姓之费，十去其七；公家之费，破军罢马，甲胄矢弓，戟盾矛橹，丘牛大车，十去其六。故智将务食于敌，食敌一钟，当吾二十钟；□①杆一石，当吾二十石。故杀敌者，怒也；取敌之利者，货也。车战得车十乘以上，赏其先得者而更其旌旗。车杂而乘之，卒善而养之，是谓胜敌而益强。故兵贵胜，不贵久。故知兵之将，民之司命。国家安危之主也。

	【注：】 ①：“忌”加“艹”头。

	

	解释：

	作战篇 孙子说：凡用兵作战的一般原则，要动用轻车千辆，重车千辆，步卒十万，还要向千里之外运输粮食，那么前方后方的经费，招待国宾使节的费用，维修保养弓箭甲盾所需的胶漆器材的补充，车辆盔甲的补修每天要开支“千金”，然后十万军队才能出动。用这样的军队去作战，就要求速胜，持久就会使军队疲惫，锐气挫伤；攻城就会使力量耗尽；长久出兵在国外，就会使国家的财政发生困难。如果军队疲惫，锐气挫伤，力量耗尽，经济枯竭，则列国诸侯就会乘着你的危机而起兵进攻，那时即使有智谋的人，也无法替你善后了。所以用兵只听说老实的速决，没有见到弄巧的持久。战争持久而对国家有利，是不会有的事情。所以不完全了解用兵有害方面的人，就不能完全了解用兵的有利方面。关于用兵的人，兵员不征集两次，粮秣不运输三回；军需自国内取用，粮食和草料在敌国就地征集，这样军队的粮草供给就可以满足了。国家之所以会因军队出动而贫穷的，就是由于远道运输，远道运输，“百姓”就会贫困。在军队集中的附近地方，东西会涨价，东西涨价，就会使得“百姓”枯竭，财政枯竭就要急于增加税收和遥役。力量耗尽，财富枯竭，国内千里原野，家家空虚。“百姓”的财产要耗去十分之七；“公室”的耗费，车辆损坏，马匹疲惫，盔甲、戟盾、蔽橹以及运输用的牛和大车，也要损失十分之六。所以聪明的将帅务求在敌国就地取粮。吃敌粮—“钟”(一钟为六百四十升)抵得本国的二十“钟”；用草料一“石”抵得本国的二十“石”。要使军队勇敢杀敌，就要激励部队；要使军队勇于夺取敌人的物资，就要奖赏士兵。在车战中，凡缴获战车十辆以上的，就奖励首先夺得战车的人，并且把车上的旗帜换成自己的旗帜，派出自己的士兵夹杂乘坐；对俘虏的兵卒要优待和供养他们。这就是所谓战胜敌人也越加壮大自己。所以用兵贵在速胜，不宜持久。所以懂得用兵的将帅，是民众的“司命”，国家安危的主宰。






孙子兵法谋攻

^

	孙子曰： 夫用兵之法，全国为上，破国次之；全军为上，破军次之；全旅为上，破旅次之；全卒为上，破卒次之；全伍为上，破伍次之。是故百战百胜，非善之善也；不战而屈人之兵，善之善者也。故上兵伐谋，其次伐交，其次伐兵，其下攻城。攻城之法，为不得已。修橹□①□②，具器械，三月而后成；距堙，又三月而后已。将不胜其忿而蚁附之，杀士卒三分之一，而城不拔者，此攻之灾也。故善用兵者，屈人之兵而非战也，拔人之城而非攻也，毁人之国而非久也，必以全争于天下，故兵不顿而利可全，此谋攻之法也。故用兵之法，十则围之，五则攻之，倍则分之，敌则能战之，少则能逃之，不若则能避之。故小敌之坚，大敌之擒也。夫将者，国之辅也。辅周则国必强，辅隙则国必弱。故君之所以患于军者三：不知军之不可以进而谓之进，不知军之不可以退而谓之退，是谓縻军；不知三军之事而同三军之政，则军士惑矣；不知三军之权而同三军之任，则军士疑矣。三军既惑且疑，则诸侯之难至矣。是谓乱军引胜。故知胜有五：知可以战与不可以战者胜，识众寡之用者胜，上下同欲者胜，以虞待不虞者胜，将能而君不御者胜。此五者，知胜之道也。故曰：知己知彼，百战不贻；不知彼而知己，一胜一负；不知彼不知己，每战必败。

	【注：】 ①：〔车贲〕。 ②：“温”字“氵”旁换“车”旁。

	解释：

	

	谋攻篇 孙子说，指导战争的法则是，使敌人举国完整地屈服是上策，击破敌国就差些；使敌人全军完整地降服是上策，击破敌人的军就差些；使敌人全“旅”完整地降服是上策，击破敌人的“旅”就差些；使敌人全“卒”完整地降服是上策，击破敌人的“卒”就差些；使敌人全“伍”完整地降服是上策，击破敌人的“伍”就差些。因此，百战百胜，还不算高明中最高明的，不战而使敌人屈服，才算得是高明中最高明的呀!所以，指导战争的上策是失败敌人的战略计谋，其次是失败敌人的外交，再次是进攻敌人的军队，下策是攻城。攻城的办法是不得已的。制造攻城用的四轮大车，准备攻城器械，三个月才能完成；构筑攻城的土山又要三个月才能竣工。将帅不胜其忿怒，驱使他的军队象蚂蚁一般去爬城，士兵伤亡三分之一，而城还是攻不下来，这就是攻城的灾害呀!所以善于指导战争的人，屈服敌人的军队不用硬打，夺取敌人的城堡不用硬攻，毁灭敌人的国家不须旷日持久。一定要用全胜的计谋争胜于天下，这样军队不致受到挫伤，而胜利可以完满取得。这就是谋划进攻的法则。所以用兵的法则，有十倍于敌的兵力就包围敌人，有五倍于敌的兵力就进攻敌人，有一倍于敌的兵力就要设法分散敌人，有与敌人相等的兵力就要善于抗击敌人。兵力比敌人少就要退却，实力比敌人弱就要避免决战。所以弱小的军队如果固执地坚守，就会成为强大敌人的俘虏了。将帅好比是国家的辅木，将帅和国家的关系如同辅木与车身互相依存。如果相依无间，国家一定强盛；相依有隙，国家一定衰弱。

	国君可能不利于军队的情况有三种：不懂得军队不可以前进而硬叫它前进，不懂得军队不可以后退而硬叫它后退，这叫牵制军队；不懂军队的内部事情而干预军事行政，就会使士兵迷惑；不懂得用兵的权谋而干预军队指挥，就会使军队怀疑。军队既迷惑而且怀疑，列国诸侯的祸患就会乘隙而来。这就是所谓乱军心，自找失败。 有五种情况可以预见胜利：凡是能看清情况知道可以打或不可以打的，就能胜利；官兵有共同欲望的，就能胜利；自己有准备以对付疏忽懈怠的敌人的，就能胜利；将帅有指挥才能而国军不加以牵制的，就能胜利。这五条，是预见胜利的方法。所以说，了解敌人了解自己，百战都不会有危险；不了解敌人而了解自己，胜败的可能各半；不了解敌人又不了解自己，那就每战必败了。






军形篇



	

	孙子曰： 昔之善战者，先为不可胜，以待敌之可胜。不可胜在己，可胜在敌。故善战者，能为不可胜，不能使敌之必可胜。故曰：胜可知，而不可为。不可胜者，守也；可胜者，攻也。守则不足，攻则有余。善守者藏于九地之下，善攻者动于九天之上，故能自保而全胜也。见胜不过众人之所知，非善之善者也；战胜而天下曰善，非善之善者也。故举秋毫不为多力，见日月不为明目，闻雷霆不为聪耳。古之所谓善战者，胜于易胜者也。故善战者之胜也，无智名，无勇功，故其战胜不忒。不忒者，其所措胜，胜已败者也。故善战者，立于不败之地，而不失敌之败也。是故胜兵先胜而后求战，败兵先战而后求胜。善用兵者，修道而保法，故能为胜败之政。兵法：一曰度，二曰量，三曰数，四曰称，五曰胜。地生度，度生量，量生数，数生称，称生胜。故胜兵若以镒称铢，败兵若以铢称镒。称胜者之战民也，若决积水于千仞之溪者，形也。

	

	解释：

	形篇

	孙子说：从前会打仗的人，先要造成不会被敌战胜的条件，来等待可以战胜敌人的机会。不会被敌人战胜，这权利操在我军自己手中。可不可能战胜敌人，却在于敌人是否犯错误暴露了弱点。所以会打仗的人，能够做到即使我们不一定会战胜敌人，但也不会被敌人战胜。所以说，胜利可以预见，而不能强求。使敌人不能胜我，这是属于防守方面的事；使我可以胜敌，这是属于进攻方面的事。采取防守，是由于兵力不足(劣势)；采取进攻，是由于兵力有余(优势)。善于防守的人，深深荫蔽自己兵力于各种地形之下；善于进攻的人，高度发挥自己力量，动作于各种天候之中。所以这样才能保存自己而取得完全消灭敌人的胜利。 预见到胜利，不超过一般人的见识，不算得高明中最高明的；经过激战而取胜普天下都说好，这也不算得高明中最高明的。这就像举得起秋毫算不得大力，看得见日月算不得眼明，听得见雷霆算不得耳聪一样。古时所说的善于打仗的人，都是在容易取得胜利的条件下战胜敌人的。所以善于打仗的人，打了胜仗，既显不出智谋的名声，也看不出勇猛的武力。因为他取得胜利，是无疑的。其所以无疑，是由于他的作战措施放在必胜的基础上，去战胜已处于失败地位的敌人。善于打仗的人，总是使自己处于不败的地位，而不放过使敌人失败的机会。因此胜利的军队有了胜利的把握，才寻找敌人交战；失败的军队先同敌人交战，希望在作战中取得侥幸的胜利。善于领导战争的人，修明政治，确保法制，所以能掌握胜败的决定权。 　　用兵之法：一是“度”，二是“量”，三是“数”，四是“称”，五是“胜”。敌对双方都有土地，有了土地就产生土地面积大小的问题；双方土地面积大小的不同，就产生物产资源多少的问题；双方物产资源多少的不同，就产生能动员和供给兵卒众寡的问题；双方人力众寡的不同，就产生军事力量轻重的对比；双方力量强弱的不同，就产生了胜败。 　　胜利的军队，在力量对比上，就像用巨石碰鸡蛋那样绝对优势，自然轻而易举，必胜无疑；失败的军队，在力量对比上，就像用鸡蛋碰巨石那样，处于绝对劣势自然无能为力，必败无疑。胜利者指挥军队作战，就像在八百丈高处的水库决堤那样，这是一种力量的表现!






兵势篇



	孙子曰： 凡治众如治寡，分数是也；斗众如斗寡，形名是也；三军之众，可使必受敌而无败者，奇正是也；兵之所加，如以□①投卵者，虚实是也。凡战者，以正合，以奇胜。故善出奇者，无穷如天地，不竭如江海。终而复始，日月是也。死而更生，四时是也。声不过五，五声之变，不可胜听也；色不过五，五色之变，不可胜观也；味不过五，五味之变，不可胜尝也；战势不过奇正，奇正之变，不可胜穷也。奇正相生，如循环之无端，孰能穷之哉！激水之疾，至于漂石者，势也；鸷鸟之疾，至于毁折者，节也。故善战者，其势险，其节短。势如扩弩，节如发机。纷纷纭纭，斗乱而不可乱；浑浑沌沌，形圆而不可败。乱生于治，怯生于勇，弱生于强。治乱，数也；勇怯，势也；强弱，形也。故善动敌者，形之，敌必从之；予之，敌必取之。以利动之，以卒待之。故善战者，求之于势，不责于人故能择人而任势。任势者，其战人也，如转木石。木石之性，安则静，危则动，方则止，圆则行。故善战人之势，如转圆石于千仞之山者，势也。

	【注：】 ①：“瑕”的“王”旁换“石”旁。

	解释：

	势篇 　　孙子说：管理大部队，如同管理小部队一样，这是由于组织得好。指挥大部队作战，如同指挥小部队作战一样，这是由于有规定好了的信号来指挥。统帅全国军队，即使遭受敌人的进攻，也不致失败，这是由于“奇正”运用得正确。所谓奇正，指在军队部署上担任守备部队，钳制敌人的为正，集中机动担任突击的为奇；在作战方式上，正面明攻为正，特殊的作战方式为奇。军队进攻所面对的敌人如同用石头打鸡蛋一样，这是由于“避实就虚”运用得适宜。 　　作战总是用“正”兵挡敌，用“奇”兵取胜。所以善于出“奇”的将帅，其战法变化就像天地那样运行无穷，像江河那样奔流不章息。入而复出，如同日月的运转；去而又来，类似四季的更迭。乐音不过五个音阶，可是五个音阶的变化，就听不胜听；颜色不过五种色素，可是五种色素的变化，就看不胜看；滋味不过五样味道，可是五样味道的变化，就尝不胜尝。作战的形式不过“奇”“正”，可是“奇”“正”的变化，就无穷无尽。“奇”“正”相互转化，就象圆环一样，无始无终，谁能穷尽它呢？! 　　湍急的水，飞快地奔流，以至能冲走石头，这就叫“势”。鸷鸟迅飞猛击，以致能捕杀小鸟小兽，这叫“节”。所说善于指挥作战的人，他所造成的势就像涨满的弓弩，短促的节奏就象击发弩机把箭突然射击一般。 　　旌旗纷纷，人马纭纭，在混乱的战斗中作战，要使军队不混乱；战车转动，步卒奔驰，在迷雾不清的情况中打仗，要部署得各方面都能对付可能发生的情况而不会被打败。 　　混乱可以从严整中发生，怯懦可以从勇敢中发生，软弱可以从坚强中发生。严整或混乱，这是组织编制的好坏的问题；勇敢或怯懦，这是态势的优劣问题；坚强或软弱，这是军事实力的问题。 　　所以善于调动敌人的将帅，伪装假象迷惑敌人，敌人就会听从调动；投其所好引诱敌人，敌人就会来夺取。用小利去调动敌人，用重兵来等待击溃它。 　　善于作战的人，要依靠有利的态势取胜，而不苛求将吏的责任。所以要能选择将吏，去利用各种有利的态势。所谓“任势”，是说善于选用将吏指挥作战，就像滚动木头、石头一般。木头、石头的本性，放在安稳平坦的地方就静止，放在险陡倾斜的地方就滚动；方的就会静止，圆的会滚动。所以，善于指挥作战的人所造成的有利态势，就像转动圆石从八百丈高山上滚下来那样。这就是所谓势呀!






虚实篇

.  

	

	孙子曰： 凡先处战地而待敌者佚，后处战地而趋战者劳。故善战者，致人而不致于人。能使敌人自至者，利之也；能使敌人不得至者，害之也。故敌佚能劳之，饱能饥之，安能动之。出其所必趋，趋其所不意。行千里而不劳者，行于无人之地也；攻而必取者，攻其所不守也。守而必固者，守其所必攻也。故善攻者，敌不知其所守；善守者，敌不知其所攻。微乎微乎，至于无形；神乎神乎，至于无声，故能为敌之司命。进而不可御者，冲其虚也；退而不可追者，速而不可及也。故我欲战，敌虽高垒深沟，不得不与我战者，攻其所必救也；我不欲战，虽画地而守之，敌不得与我战者，乖其所之也。故形人而我无形，则我专而敌分。我专为一，敌分为十，是以十攻其一也。则我众敌寡，能以众击寡者，则吾之所与战者约矣。吾所与战之地不可知，不可知则敌所备者多，敌所备者多，则吾所与战者寡矣。故备前则后寡，备后则前寡，备左则右寡，备右则左寡，无所不备，则无所不寡。寡者，备人者也；众者，使人备己者也。故知战之地，知战之日，则可千里而会战；不知战之地，不知战日，则左不能救右，右不能救左，前不能救后，后不能救前，而况远者数十里，近者数里乎！以吾度之，越人之兵虽多，亦奚益于胜哉！故曰：胜可为也。敌虽众，可使无斗。故策之而知得失之计，候之而知动静之理，形之而知死生之地，角之而知有余不足之处。故形兵之极，至于无形。无形则深间不能窥，智者不能谋。因形而措胜于众，众不能知。人皆知我所以胜之形，而 莫知吾所以制胜之形。故其战胜不复，而应形于无穷。夫兵形象水，水之行避高而趋下，兵之形避实而击虚；水因地而制流，兵因敌而制胜。故兵无常势，水无常形。能因敌变化而取胜者，谓之神。故五行无常胜，四时无常位，日有短长，月有死生。

	

	解释：

	虚实篇 　　凡先到战场等待敌人的就从容、主动，后到战场奔走应战的就疲劳。所以善于指挥作战的人，能调动敌人而不被敌人调动。 　　能使敌人自动进到我预定地域的，是用小利引诱的结果；能使敌人不能到达其预定地域的，是制造困难阻止了它。所以敌人休整得好，就要设法使它疲劳；敌人粮食充足，就设法使它饥饿；敌人住扎安稳，就得使它移动。 　　进军要向敌人不及急救的地方，急进要向敌人意料不到的方向。行军千里而不劳顿的，是因为走的是没敌人阻碍的地区。而进攻必然会得手的，是因为进攻的是敌人不防守或不易防守的地点。防御而必然能稳固的，是因为扼守的是敌人进攻或不易进攻的地方。 　　所以善于进攻的，能使敌人不知道怎么防守；善于防御的，能使敌人不知道怎么进攻。 微妙呀!微妙到看不出形迹。神奇呀!神奇到听不见声息。这样就能主宰敌人的命运。 　　前进而使敌人不能抵御的，是因为冲击敌人空虚的地方；后退而使敌人无法追击的，是因为退得迅速使敌人追赶不上。所以我军想要打，敌人虽然高垒深沟，也不得不出来同我作战的，是因为进攻敌人所必求的地方；我军不想打，虽然画地防守，敌人也无法来同我作战的，是因为我们诱使敌人改变了他们进攻的方向。 　　能察明敌人情况而不让敌人察明我军的情况，这样我军的兵力就可以集中而敌人兵力就不得不分散。我军兵力集中在一处，敌人兵力分散在十处，这就是用十倍于敌人的兵力去攻击敌人，这样我军就成了优势，敌人就转为劣势了。能够集中优势兵力攻击劣势的敌人，那么同我军当面作战的敌人就有限了。我军所要进攻的地方敌人不得而知，不得而知，那么它所要防备的地方就多，敌人防备的地方一多，那么我军所要进攻的敌人就少了。 　　所以防备了前面，后面的兵力就薄弱；防备了后面，前面的兵力就薄弱；防备了左边，右边的兵力就薄弱；防备了右边，左边的兵力就薄弱；到处到防备，就到处兵力薄弱。兵力劣势是因为被动地去防备敌人；兵力优势是因为使敌人被动地防备我军。 　　能预料在什么地方打，在什么时候打，就是千里也可以同敌人交战；不能预料在什么地方打，那就连左翼也不能救右翼，右翼也不能救左翼，前面不能救后面，后面也不能救前面，何况远在数十里，近在数里呢？ 　　依我分析，越国的兵虽多，又有什么补益于决定战争的胜败呢？ 　　所以说，胜利是可以人为造成的。敌军虽多，可以使他无法战斗。 所以要筹算一下计谋，来分析得失利害；骚扰一下敌军，来了解敌人的动静规律；侦察一下情况，来了解哪里有利哪里不利；进行一下小战，来了解敌人哪方面优势哪方面劣势。 　　所以伪装佯动做得最好的，就看不出形迹。看不出形迹，即使有深蔵的间谍也窥察不到底细，聪明的敌人也想不出办法来。 　　适应敌情而取胜，把胜利果实摆在众人面前，众人还是莫明其妙；人们只知道我们所以战胜敌人的作战方式，却不知道我们怎样灵活运用这些作战方式。所以每次打胜仗，都不是重复老的方式，而是适应不同的情况，变化无穷。 作战方式有点像水，水运动的规律是避开高处而向下奔流，作战的规律是避开敌人坚实的地方而攻击敌人的弱点，水因地形而制约它奔流的方向，作战则根据敌情而决定取胜的方针。所以作战没有固定的方式，就像水没有固定的形态一样，能根据敌情变化而取胜的，就叫用兵如神。 用兵规律就像自然现象一样，水、火、木、金、土互生互制；春夏秋冬四季交替。昼有长短，月有圆缺，永远处于变化之中。






军争篇



	孙子曰： 凡用兵之法，将受命于君，合军聚众，交和而舍，莫难于军争。军争之难者，以迂为直，以患为利。故迂其途，而诱之以利，后人发，先人至，此知迂直之计者也。军争为利，军争为危。举军而争利则不及，委军而争利则辎重捐。是故卷甲而趋，日夜不处，倍道兼行，百里而争利，则擒三将军，劲者先，疲者后，其法十一而至；五十里而争利，则蹶上将军，其法半至；三十里而争利，则三分之二至。是故军无辎重则亡，无粮食则亡，无委积则亡。故不知诸侯之谋者，不能豫交；不知山林、险阻、沮泽之形者，不能行军；不用乡导者，不能得地利。故兵以诈立，以利动，以分和为变者也。故其疾如风，其徐如林，侵掠如火，不动如山，难知如阴，动如雷震。掠乡分众，廓地分利，悬权而动。先知迂直之计者胜，此军争之法也。《军政》曰：“言不相闻，故为之金鼓；视不相见，故为之旌旗。”夫金鼓旌旗者，所以一民之耳目也。民既专一，则勇者不得独进，怯者不得独退，此用众之法也。故夜战多金鼓，昼战多旌旗，所以变人之耳目也。三军可夺气，将军可夺心。是故朝气锐，昼气惰，暮气归。善用兵者，避其锐气，击其惰归，此治气者也。以治待乱，以静待哗，此治心者也。以近待远，以佚待劳，以饱待饥，此治力者也。无邀正正之旗，无击堂堂之陈，此治变者也。 故用兵之法，高陵勿向，背丘勿逆，佯北勿从，锐卒勿攻，饵兵勿食，归师勿遏，围师遗阙，穷寇勿迫，此用兵之法也。

	

	军争篇 孙子说：一般用兵的规律，主将接受国君的命令，从动员组织民众、编成军队到同敌人对阵，在这过程中没有比战略前进中争取主动而获得更困难的。争取主动而先发制人之所以困难，是因为要把从表面看似遥远的迂回的弯路，变为实际上是近便的直路，是要把困难变成有利。所以故意迂回绕道，并用小利引诱敌人，这样就能比敌人后出动又比敌人先到达所要争夺的战场要地，这就叫做懂得以迂为直的计谋。 所以争取先发制人是有利的，同时争取先发制人也是有危险的。如果全军带着装备辎重去争利，这样行军迟缓就不能及时到达预定地域；如果放下重装备和辎重去争利，装备和辎重就会丢失。因此，卷起盔甲，轻装急进，昼夜不停，加倍行程来赶路，走上百里去争利，如果遇到意外情况那么三军将领都可能被俘，队伍强壮的先到，疲弱的掉队，其结果只会有十分之一的人马赶得到；走五十里去争利，如果遇到情况，先头部队的将领会受挫折，队伍只有半数赶得到；走三十里去争利，可能有三分之二赶得到。要知道军队没有随军辎重就不能生存，没有粮食接济就不能生存，没有物资补充就不能生存。 不了解列国政治动向的，不能预定外交方针；不熟悉山林、险阻、水网、沼泽等地形的，不能行军；不重用向导的，不能得到地利。 军队是用诡诈的方法隐蔽自己的意图，根据有利的情况决定自己的行动，把分散和集中兵力作为战略战术的变化的。 所以军队的行动迅速起来像疾风，舒缓的时候像森林，攻击起来像烈火，不动的时候像山岳，难以窥测像阴天不见日月星辰，一动起来像迅雷不及掩耳、闪电不及瞬目。 占领敌方的乡村城镇，扩张领土，分配掠夺来的资源和俘虏，衡量利害得失，然后决定行动。 事先懂得以迂为直的计谋的就胜利，这就是争夺先机之利的原则。 古代一部叫《军政》的书中说：“因相互间听不见讲话，所以设置锣鼓来指挥；相互间看不见动作，所以设置旌旗来指挥。”锣鼓、旌旗是统一军人耳目的，人们的视听既然一致，那么勇敢的就不能单独前进，怯懦的也不能单独后退了。这就是指挥大部队作战的方法。所以夜间作战多用火光和鼓声，白天作战多用旗帜。这些不同的指挥讯号是为了适应人们的视听而变动使用。 对于敌人的军队，可以打击它的士气，对于敌人的将领，可以搅乱他的决心。早晨朝气饱满，中午以后逐渐懈怠，傍晚就疲乏思归了。所以善于用兵的人，要避开敌人刚上阵时的锐气，等待敌人松懈疲惫时再去打它，这是掌握军队士气的方法。用自己部队的饱食等待敌人的饥饿，这是掌握军队战斗力的方法。不去拦击旗帜整齐、配备精良的敌人，不去攻击阵容堂皇实力强大的敌军，这是掌握机动变化的方法。 用兵的法则是：敌军占领山地，不要去仰攻，敌军背靠高地，不要去正攻，敌军假退不要去跟踪追击，敌军精锐所在不要去招惹，敌军用小利诱我不要上钩，敌军退回本国不要去拦截，包围敌军要留缺口，敌军已到绝境可能拼命时，不要急于迫近，这是用兵的法则。






九变篇

   

	孙子曰： 凡用兵之法，将受命于君，合军聚合。泛地无舍，衢地合交，绝地无留，围地则谋，死地则战，途有所不由，军有所不击，城有所不攻，地有所不争，君命有所不受。故将通于九变之利者，知用兵矣；将不通九变之利，虽知地形，不能得地之利矣；治兵不知九变之术，虽知五利，不能得人之用矣。是故智者之虑，必杂于利害，杂于利而务可信也，杂于害而患可解也。是故屈诸侯者以害，役诸侯者以业，趋诸侯者以利。故用兵之法，无恃其不来，恃吾有以待之；无恃其不攻，恃吾有所不可攻也。故将有五危，必死可杀，必生可虏，忿速可侮，廉洁可辱，爱民可烦。凡此五者，将之过也，用兵之灾也。覆军杀将，必以五危，不可不察也。

	

	九变篇 　　孙子说：用兵的法则是：主将接受国君的命令，动员组织民众编制成军队出征，在难以行军的地段内不可建造营地，在四通八达的地区应结交诸侯，在不具备生活条件的地区不可停留，遇到道路狭窄进退两难的地段就要巧出计谋，陷入不迅速奋战就只有死亡的地区就要坚决奋战就只有死亡的地区就要坚决奋战。 　　道路有的虽可走而不走，敌军有的虽可打而不打，城堡有的虽可攻而不攻，地方有的虽可争而不争，国君有的命令虽可受而不受。 　　将帅能精通以上各种机变的运用，就是懂得用兵了。将帅不精通以上各种机变的应用，虽然了解地形，也不能得到地利。指挥军队不知道各种机变的方法，虽然知道“五利”，也不能充分发挥军队的战斗力。 　　聪明的将帅的思考，必须兼顾到利害两个方面，在不利情况中要同时看到有利条件，才能提高胜利信心；在顺利情况中要同时看到不利条件，才能解除可能发生的祸患。 　　要使各国诸侯的力量不能伸展，就要用计谋去伤害它；要使各国诸侯忙于应付，就要用它不得不做的事业驱使它；要使各国诸侯疲于奔命，就要用小利去引诱它。 　　用兵的法则，不要指望敌人不来打，而要依靠我们有了准备等待它，不要指望敌人不进攻，而要依靠我们有了使敌人进攻不下的力量和办法。 　　将帅有五种性格上的缺陷会造成危险：只知死拼会被杀，贪生怕死会被虏，急燥易怒则经不起刺激，廉洁自爱则受不了侮辱，爱护居民则会因掩护居民而遭受烦劳。这五种危险，是将帅的过错，也是用兵的灾害呀!军队覆灭、将帅被杀，都由于这五种危险引起，是不可以不警惕的。


www.56ｗeｎ．ＣＯＭ



行军篇



	孙子曰： 凡处军相敌，绝山依谷，视生处高，战隆无登，此处山之军也。绝水必远水，客绝水而来，勿迎之于水内，令半渡而击之利，欲战者，无附于水而迎客，视生处高，无迎水流，此处水上之军也。绝斥泽，唯亟去无留，若交军于斥泽之中，必依水草而背众树，此处斥泽之军也。平陆处易，右背高，前死后生，此处平陆之军也。凡此四军之利，黄帝之所以胜四帝也。凡军好高而恶下，贵阳而贱阴，养生而处实，军无百疾，是谓必胜。丘陵堤防，必处其阳而右背之，此兵之利，地之助也。上雨水流至，欲涉者，待其定也。凡地有绝涧、天井、天牢、天罗、天陷、天隙，必亟去之，勿近也。吾远之，敌近之；吾迎之，敌背之。军旁有险阻、潢井、蒹葭、小林、□①荟者，必谨覆索之，此伏奸之所处也。敌近而静者，恃其险也；远而挑战者，欲人之进也；其所居易者，利也；众树动者，来也；众草多障者，疑也；鸟起者，伏也；兽骇者，覆也；尘高而锐者，车来也；卑而广者，徒来也；散而条达者，樵采也；少而往来者，营军也；辞卑而备者，进也；辞强而进驱者，退也；轻车先出居其侧者，陈也；无约而请和者，谋也；奔走而陈兵者，期也；半进半退者，诱也；杖而立者，饥也；汲而先饮者，渴也；见利而不进者，劳也；鸟集者，虚也；夜呼者，恐也；军扰者，将不重也；旌旗动者，乱也；吏怒者，倦也；杀马肉食者，军无粮也；悬□②不返其舍者，穷寇也；谆谆□③□③，徐与人言者，失众也；数赏者，窘也；数罚者，困也；先暴而后畏其众者，不精之至也；来委谢者，欲休息也。兵怒而相迎，久而不合，又不相去，必谨察之。兵非贵益多也，惟无武进，足以并力料敌取人而已。夫惟无虑而易敌者，必擒于人。卒未亲而罚之，则不服，不服则难用。卒已亲附而罚不行，则不可用。故合之以文，齐之以武，是谓必取。令素行以教其民，则民服；令素不行以教其民，则民不服。令素行者，与众相得也。

	【注：】 ①：“翳”加“艹”头。 ②：〔垂瓦〕。 ③：〔讠翕〕。

	行军篇 　　孙子说：军队在各种地形上处置和判断敌情时，应该注意以下原则：通过山地，必须靠近山谷，驻在高处，使前面视界开阔。敌人占领高处，不宜云仰攻，这是军队在山地上的处置。横渡江河，应远离水流；敌人渡水而来，不要迎击它于水内，让它渡过一半时去攻击它，才有利；想决战的，不要紧靠水边抗击敌人；沿河驻扎军队也应驻在高处，使前面视界开阔，不要面迎水流，这是军队在江河水流上的处置。通过盐碱沼泽地带，要迅速离开，不可逗留；如果同敌军相遇于盐碱沼泽地带上，那就必须靠近水草而背靠树林，这是军队在盐碱沼泽地带的处置。在平原上应占领开阔地域，主要的翼侧和后方应倚托高地，前低后高，这是军队在平原地上的处置。掌握这四种利用地形的原则，就是黄帝之所以战胜四周部落的原因啊! 　　凡是驻军一定选择干燥的高地，而避开潮湿的洼地；要求向阳，而回避阴暗；接近水草；保持供应，驻扎高处；这样军中没有各种疾病，也就是胜利的保证了。对于丘陵堤防，应占领它向阳的一面，而把主要的翼侧和后方倚托着它。这些对于用兵有利的措施和处理，是利用地形作为辅助条件的。 　　河流上游下雨看到水沫漂来，要徒涉的，应等待水流稍定，以防山洪暴至。 　　地形有的前后险峻，水横其中，断绝人行；有的是四面陡峭，溪水注流的天然大井；有的是三面环山，易近难出的天然大牢；有的是草深林密、行动困难的天罗地网；有的是地势低洼、道路泥泞的天然陷井；有的是千沟万壑的天然地隙。遇上这些地形必须迅速离开，不可接近。我们应远离这种地形，让敌人去靠近它；我们应面向着它，而让敌人去背靠着它。 　　进军路上遇有悬崖绝壁的隘路、湖沼、水网、芦芜、山林和草木茂盛的地方。必须谨慎地反复搜索，这些都是敌人可能设下埋伏或隐蔽侦探的地方。 　　敌人逼近而安静的，是依靠他占领地形的险要；敌人远离而来挑战的，是想诱我前进；敌人所以不居险要而占领平地，一定是有利于同我决战。 　　无风而许多树木摇动的，是敌人荫蔽前来，丛草中有许多障碍的，是敌人布下的疑阵；鸟儿突然飞起，是下面有伏兵；野兽惊骇而走动的，是敌人隐蔽来袭；尘土高而尖的，是敌人的战车来了；尘土低而宽的，是敌人的步兵来了；尘土疏散飞扬的，是敌人在砍草曳柴；尘土少而时起时落的，是敌人正在扎营。 　　敌人派来的使者措词谦逊而却正在加紧备战的，是准备进攻；措词强硬而摆出进攻姿态的，是准备后退；轻车先出去，部署在翼侧的，是在布列阵势；没有约会而来讲和的，是另有阴谋；敌人兵卒奔走而摆开兵车列阵的，是期待同我决战；敌人半进半退的，是企图引诱我军上钩。 敌兵倚着兵器而站立的，是饥饿的表现；敌兵打水而自己先饮的，是干渴的表现；敌人见利而不前进的，是疲劳的表现；敌人营寨上集聚鸟雀的，正面是空营；敌人夜间惊叫的，是恐慌的表现；敌军惊扰的，是敌将不持重；旗帜摇动不整齐的，是敌人队伍已经混乱；敌人军官易怒的，是疲倦的表现；用粮食喂马，杀掉拉辎重大车的牛吃肉，收拾起炊具，部队不返营舍的，是准备拼命突围或逃跑的穷寇；低声下气同部下讲话的，是敌将失去人心；不断奖励的，是敌军没有办法；不断惩罚的，是敌军处境困难；先强暴而后又害怕部下的，是最不精明的将领；派来使者谈判措词委婉态度谦逊的，是敌人想休战；敌军愤怒向我前进，但久不交锋又不撤退的，必须谨慎观察他的企图。 　　兵力不在于越多越好，只要不盲目冒进，而能集中力量，判明敌情，选拔人才，就行啦。只有那种毫无深思熟虑而又轻敌的人，必定会被敌人所俘虏。 　　将帅在兵卒不未曾亲近依附之前就执行惩罚，他们会不服，不服就很难合作。兵卒已经依附以后，如果纪律不能执行，也不能用来作战。所以要用“文”的“怀柔手段”去管理他们，用“武”的军纪军法使他们整齐一致，这样的军队打起仗来就必能胜利。平素严格贯彻命令来管教兵卒，兵卒就会养成服从的习惯，平时不能严格贯彻命令来管教兵卒，兵卒就会养成不服从的习惯。命令平时能够贯彻执行的，是将帅同兵卒之间相处得好的表现。

	地形篇孙子曰： 地形有通者、有挂者、有支者、有隘者、有险者、有远者。我可以往，彼可以来，曰通。通形者，先居高阳，利粮道，以战则利。可以往，难以返，曰挂。挂形者，敌无备，出而胜之，敌若有备，出而不胜，难以返，不利。我出而不利，彼出而不利，曰支。支形者，敌虽利我，我无出也，引而去之，令敌半出而击之利。隘形者，我先居之，必盈之以待敌。若敌先居之，盈而勿从，不盈而从之。险形者，我先居之，必居高阳以待敌；若敌先居之，引而去之，勿从也。远形者，势均难以挑战，战而不利。凡此六者，地之道也，将之至任，不可不察也。凡兵有走者、有驰者、有陷者、有崩者、有乱者、有北者。凡此六者，非天地之灾，将之过也。夫势均，以一击十，曰走；卒强吏弱，曰驰；吏强卒弱，曰陷；大吏怒而不服，遇敌怼而自战，将不知其能，曰崩；将弱不严，教道不明，吏卒无常，陈兵纵横，曰乱；将不能料敌，以少合众，以弱击强，兵无选锋，曰北。凡此六者，败之道也，将之至任，不可不察也。夫地形者，兵之助也。料敌制胜，计险隘远近，上将之道也。知此而用战者必胜，不知此而用战者必败。故战道必胜，主曰无战，必战可也；战道不胜，主曰必战，无战可也。故进不求名，退不避罪，唯民是保，而利于主，国之宝也。视卒如婴儿，故可以与之赴深溪；视卒如爱子，故可与之俱死。厚而不能使，爱而不能令，乱而不能治，譬若骄子，不可用也。知吾卒之可以击，而不知敌之不可击，胜之半也；知敌之可击，而不知吾卒之不可以击，胜之半也；知敌之可击，知吾卒之可以击，而不知地形之不可以战，胜之半也。故知兵者，动而不迷，举而不穷。故曰：知彼知己，胜乃不殆；知天知地，胜乃可全。


wwＷ、xiabook.com



地形篇

   

	 　　孙子说：地域形态有“通”、“挂”、“支”、“隘”、“险”、“远”等六形。我们可以去，敌人可以来的地域，叫做“通”。在这种“通”形的地域上，应先占领视界开阔的高地，沟通并保护粮道，这样作战就有利。可以前进，难以后退的地域叫做“挂”。在这种“挂”形地域上，如果敌人没有防备，就可以突然出击而战胜它；如果敌人有防备，出击而不能取胜，又难以退回，就不利了。我军前出不利，敌军前出也不利，叫做“支”。在这种“支”形地域上，纵然敌人利诱我们，我们也不要前出；可引兵离去，让敌人前出一半然后回击它，这样就有利。在“隘”形的地域上，如果我们先到达，必须先出占领隘口的，等待敌人来犯；如果敌人先到达，已前出占领隘口的，不要去打；没有占领隘口的，可以去打。在“险”形的地域上，如果我军先到达，必须控制视界开阔的高地，以等待敌人来犯；如果敌人先到达，就应引兵离去，不要去打它。在“远”形地域上，双方形势均等，不宜挑战，勉强求战，就不利。这六条，是利用地形的原则，将帅重大责任所在，是不可以不认真研究的。

	　　地形是用兵的辅助条件。判明敌人企图，研究地形险易，计算道路远近，制定取胜计划，这是主将的职责。懂得这些道理去指挥作战的，必然会胜利，不懂得这些道理去指挥作战的，必然会失败。 　　从战争规律上看来必然会胜利的，虽然国君说不打，也可以坚持去打；从战争规律上看来不能打胜仗的，虽然国君说一定要打，也可以不去打。应该进不贪求战功，退不回避罪责，只知道保护民众而利于国君。这样的将帅，是国家宝贵的财产。 　　将帅对待兵卒像对待婴儿一样体贴，就可以叫他们跟随自己去赴汤蹈火；对待兵卒像爱子一样，就可以叫他们去拼死。如果厚待而不能指使，抚爱而不能命令，违法乱纪而不能治理，那就像骄子一样，是不能用来作战的。 　　了解自己的部队能打，而不了解敌人不可以打，胜利的可能只有一半；了解敌人可打，?而不了解自己的部队不能打，胜利的可能只有一半；了解敌人可打，也了解自己的部队能打，而不了解地形之不利于作战，胜利的可能也只有一半。所以懂得用兵的人，行动不会迷惑，措施却又变化无穷。所以说，了解敌人，了解自己，胜利就没有危险；懂得天时，懂得地利，胜利就可保完全。






九地篇



	　　孙子说：按用兵的规律，地区在战略上因位置和条件不同，对作战将发生不同的影响的地区可分为“散地”、“轻地”、“交地”、“衢地”、“重地”、“圮地”、“围地”、“死地”。诸侯在本国境内作战的地区，叫做“散地”。进入别人国境不深的地区，叫做“轻地”。我军得到有利、敌军得到也有利的地区，叫做“争地”。我军可以往，敌军也可以来的地区，叫做“交地”。处在三国交界的、先到就可以结交周围诸侯取得多助的地区，叫做“衢地”。深入敌境，背后有很多敌人城邑的地区，叫做“重地”。山岭、森林、险要、阴寨、水网、湖沼等难于通行的地区，叫做“圮地”。所由进入的道路狭隘，所从退归的道路迂远，敌军用少数兵力就可以攻击我多数兵力的地区，叫做“围地”。迅速奋勇作战就能生存，不迅速奋勇作战就只有死亡的地区，叫做“死地”。因此在“散地”上，不宜作战；在“轻地”上不易停留；遇“争地”应先敌占领，不要等待敌人占领后再去进攻；逢“交地”，应部署部队之间的联系，切勿失去联络；到“衢地”，则应加强外交活动，结交诸侯；深入“重地”，就要掠取粮草物资，遇到“圮地”，就要迅速通过；陷入“围地”，就要运谋设计；到了“死地”，就要奋勇作战死里求生。        古来善于作战的人，能使敌人前后部队不能相策应，主力和小部队不能相信靠，官兵不能相救应，上下无法收拢，兵卒离散集合不起来，队伍集合而不齐整。能造成有利于我的局面就打(行动)，不能造成有利于我的局面就停止。请问：“假使敌军众多，而严整地向我前进，该怎样对付它呢？”回答说：“先夺取敌人所心爱的有利条件，就能使它陷入被动而听从我们调动了。” 用兵的要旨就是要迅速，乘敌人措手不及的时机，走敌人意料不到的道路，攻击敌人没有戒备的地方。 　　一般进入敌国作战的规律是：深入敌境，则专心一致，使敌方不能抵抗；在丰饶的田野上掠取粮草，使全军得到足够的给养；注意保养士兵的体力，不使过于疲劳，提高士气，集中力量；部署兵力，巧设计谋，使敌人莫测高深。把部队投放在无路可走的地方，就只能拼死而不能败退，既然士卒肯拼死，又哪有不得胜之理，上下也就都能尽力而战了。要知道兵士深陷危险的境地，就不恐惧，无路可走，军心就会巩固，深入敌国，行动就不敢散漫，迫不得已，就只好坚决战斗。因此这种军队不待修整，都懂得戒备，不待鼓励，都愿意出力，不待约束，都能亲密协力，不待申令，都会遵守纪律。禁止迷信，消除部署的疑惑，至死也无处走。我军士兵没有多余的钱财，不是士兵们不想爱财物；我军没有贪生胆小的人，不是士兵们都不想长命。当作战命令颁发的时候，士兵们坐着的泪湿衣襟，躺着的泪流满面。把他们投到除了向前拼命再无别路可走的地方，就会有象专诸(春秋吴国勇士)和曹刿(春秋鲁国武士)一样的勇敢了。 　　善于用兵的人，能使部队像“率然”；“率然”是常山地方的蛇名。打它的头，尾就来救应，打它的尾，头就来救应，打它的腰，头尾都来救应。请问“可以使军队像‘率然’一样吗？”回答说：“可以”。吴国人和越国人是相互仇恨的，但当他们同舟渡河遇到大风时，他们互相救援就像一个人的左右手。因此缚住马匹，埋了车轮，企图防止兵卒的逃亡，也是靠不住的；要使部队一齐奋勇作战，在于将帅领导的得法；要使强弱都能发挥作用，在于地形利用的适宜。所以善于用兵的人，能使全军手牵手地像一个人一样，这是因为使它不得不这样啊。 　　将军的处事；镇静以求深思，严正而有条理。能蒙蔽士兵的耳，使他们对于军事行动毫无所识。战法经常变化，计谋不断更新，使人们无法识破机关；驻军常换地方，进军多绕迂路，使人们推测不出意图。主帅授给军队任务，要像登高而抽去梯子一样使他们能进而不能退；率领军队深入诸侯国境，要象拨弩机而射出箭矢一般使他们可往而不可返。烧掉渡船，打破饭锅，像赶羊群，赶过去赶过来，让大家只知道跟着走，不知道要到哪里去。聚集全军兵卒，投放在危险的境地使他们不能不拼命作战，这就是将军的责任!进到各种不同地区的机变，能屈能伸地利用情况的发展，对各种人员心理的掌握，这些都是将帅不能不研究的。 　　进入敌国作战的规律是：进入得深，兵卒就专心一致，进入得浅，就容易逃散。离开本国越境出兵的，就是进入了“绝地”；四通八达的叫做“衢地”，进入深的，叫做“重地”；进入浅的，叫做“轻地”；背后有坚固的城堡而前面道路狭隘的，叫做“围地”；无处可走的叫做“死地”。 　　因此，在“散地”，就得使军队专心一致；在“轻地”上，就要部署连续；遇“争地”，就要急进，抄到敌军的后面；逢“交地”，就要谨慎防守；到“衢地”，就要巩固和邻国的结交；入“重地”，就要补充军粮；经“圮地”，就要迅速通过；陷入“围地”就要堵塞缺口；到了“死地”，就要表示拼死战斗的决心。 　　兵卒的心理，被包围就会抵抗，迫不得已就会战斗，陷于十分危险的境地就会听从指挥。 不了解诸侯国计谋的，不能与他们结交；不熟悉山岭、森林、险要、阻塞、水网、湖沼等地理形势的，就不能行军；不重用向导的，就不能得地利。这几方面，有一方面不了解，都不能称为霸、王的军队。凡是霸、王的军队，进攻大国就能使敌方的民众和军队来不及动员集中；威力加在敌人头上，就能使他不能同别国结交。因此不必要争着同哪一国结交，不必要随便培养哪一国的势力，只要伸展自己的意图，把威力加在敌人头上，就可以拔取敌人的城堡，毁灭敌人的国都。施行超越法定的奖赏，颁布打破常规的号令，驱使全军兵众就象指使一个人一般。叫他们去执行任务，不必说明为什么；叫他们去夺利，不告诉他们有危险。 　　把军队投放在“亡地”上，然后能保存；把兵卒陷于“死地”，反而能得生。兵众陷入危险的境地，然后才能操纵胜败。 　　指挥作战的事，在于假装顺从敌人的意图，却集中兵力，朝一个方面进攻，长驱千里，杀其将领，这就是所谓巧妙能成大事呀! 　　当决定战争行动的时候，就要封锁关口，销毁通行证件，不许敌国的使者来往；在宗庙里秘密地、认真地谋划这件大事。敌人一有空隙，就迅速乘机而入。先夺取敌人的要地，不要同敌方约期会战。实施作战计划时，要灵活地随着敌情的变化作相应的修改，来决定军事行动以求战争的胜利。因此开始像处女一般沉静，使敌人不注意防备，然后象逃脱的兔子一样突然行动，使敌人来不及抵抗。






火攻篇

  

	孙子说火攻有五种：一是火烧营寨，二是火烧积聚，三是火烧军用物资，四是火烧仓库，五是火烧粮道。实施火攻必须有条件，火攻器材必须经常准备着。放火要看天时，起火要看日子。天时是指季候的干燥；日子是指月亮行经“箕”、“壁”、“翼”、“轸”四星宿的位置；月亮经过四星宿的日子，就是风的日子。 　　凡用火攻，必须凭借这五种火攻的变化适时地运用兵力配合它。从敌人内部放火，就要及时派兵从外部策应。火已烧起而敌军仍然保持安静的，应等待一下，不可马上发起攻击，应加猛火势，如果可以进攻就进攻，不可进攻就停止。如果从外面放火，就不必等待内应，只在适时放火就行。火在上风放，不可以从下风进攻。白天风刮久了，夜晚就容易停止。军队必须懂得灵活地运用五种火攻的方法，并根据观察有起风的征候时使用它。 　　用火辅助进攻的，明显地容易取胜；用水辅助进攻的，攻势可以加强。水可以断绝敌军，但不如火攻那样可以焚毁敌人的物资器械。 　　凡打了胜仗，夺取了土地城邑，而不能达到战略目的的会遭殃，这是白白耗费国家的兵力财力、使军队久留在外。所以说：明智的国君要慎重地考虑这件事，良好的将帅要认真地研究这件事。不是有利有行动，不是能胜不用兵，不到危机紧迫之时不轻易开战。国君不可因愤怒而发动战争，将帅不可因气忿而出阵求战。对国家有利才行动，对国家不利就停止。愤怒可以恢复到欢喜，气忿可以恢复到高兴；国亡了就不能复存，人死了就不能再生。所以明智的国君对此要慎重，良好的将帅对此要警惕；这是安定国宝和促使军队的关键!






用间篇

。下 书网

	孙子曰： 凡兴师十万，出征千里，百姓之费，公家之奉，日费千金，内外骚动，怠于道路，不得操事者，七十万家。相守数年，以争一日之胜，而爱爵禄百金，不知敌之情者，不仁之至也，非民之将也，非主之佐也，非胜之主也。故明君贤将所以动而胜人，成功出于众者，先知也。先知者，不可取于鬼神，不可象于事，不可验于度，必取于人，知敌之情者也。故用间有五：有因间，有内间，有反间，有死间，有生间。五间俱起，莫知其道，是谓神纪，人君之宝也。乡间者，因其乡人而用之；内间者，因其官人而用之；反间者，因其敌间而用之；死间者，为诳事于外，令吾闻知之而传于敌间也；生间者，反报也。故三军之事，莫亲于间，赏莫厚于间，事莫密于间，非圣贤不能用间，非仁义不能使间，非微妙不能得间之实。微哉微哉！无所不用间也。间事未发而先闻者，间与所告者兼死。凡军之所欲击，城之所欲攻，人之所欲杀，必先知其守将、左右、谒者、门者、舍人之姓名，令吾间必索知之。敌间之来间我者，因而利之，导而舍之，故反间可得而用也；因是而知之，故乡间、内间可得而使也；因是而知之，故死间为诳事，可使告敌；因是而知之，故生间可使如期。五间之事，主必知之，知之必在于反间，故反间不可不厚也。 昔殷之兴也，伊挚在夏；周之兴也，吕牙在殷。故明君贤将，能以上智为间者，必成大功。此兵之要，三军之所恃而动也。

	孙子说：凡是兴兵十万，出征千里，“百姓”的耗费，“公室”的开支，每天要花费“千金”；全国内动乱不安，运输军需物资的队伍疲惫于道路上，因而不能耕作的将有七十万家。这样地相持几年，只为了争一朝胜利，如果吝惜爵禄和金钱不重用间谍，以致不能了解敌情而致失败，那就是最不仁慈的人，就不是良好的将领，就不是国君的好助手，就不能打胜仗的好国君。开明的国君、贤良的将帅，其所以动辄战胜敌人，成功地超出众人者，就在于事先了解情况。要事先了解情况，不可用祈求鬼神去获取，不可用相似的事情做类比推测吉凶，不可用夜视星晨运行的度数去验证，一定要从知道敌人情况的人那时去取得。 　　使用间谍有五种：有“因间”、“内间”、“反间”、“死间”、“生间”。五种间谍同时都使用起来，使敌人莫测高深，这是神妙的道理，是国君的法宝。所谓“因间”是收买敌方乡人做间谍。所谓“内间”，是收买敌方官吏做间谍。所谓“反间”，是诱使敌方间谍为我所用。所谓“死间”，是我方间谍先散布假情况，使敌人信以为真，上当受骗，我间谍被敌人捉住后不免被处死。所谓“生间”，就是能活着回报敌情的。 　　所以在军队人事中，没有比间谍更亲信的，奖赏没有比间谍更优厚的，事情没有比间谍更秘密的。不是高明智慧的将领，不能利用间谍；不是仁慈慷慨的指挥官，不能指使间谍；不是用心微妙的将领，不能取得间谍的真实情报。微妙呀!微妙呀!无所不可以利用间谍啊!间谍的工作尚未进行，先已传泄在外，那么间谍和听到秘密的人都要处死。 　　凡对要打的敌方军队，要攻的敌方城堡，要杀的敌方官员，必须先打听那些守城将官、左右亲信、掌管传达通报的官员、守门官吏和宫中近侍官员等的姓名，使我们的间谍一定要侦察清楚。 　　必须搜索出前来侦察我军的敌方间谍，要用重金收买，优礼款待，诱导安置，使为我用，这样“反间”就可以为我所用了。由此而了解情况，这样“乡间”、“内间”就可以为我所用了；由此而了解情况，这样就能使“生间”按预定时间回报敌情。五种间谍的使用，主持者都必须懂得。了解情况最主要的在于“反间”，所以对“反间”是不可不厚待的。 　　从前商朝的兴起，是由于伊尹(了解夏朝情况的商朝人)曾经在夏；周朝的兴起，是由于姜尚(即子牙，了解殷的情况)曾经在殷。所以明智的国君，贤能的将帅，能用高级的有智慧的人做间谍的，一定能建树大功。这是用兵重要的一着，整个军队是要依靠间谍提供情报来决定行动的呀!




下书网 手机端免费下载txt http://m.xiabook.com ，最有文艺气息的文学网站，我们提供给您的小说不求最多，但求最经典最完整