《PRINCE CASPIAN》查看《PRINCE CASPIAN》书评和最新更新以及相关书籍推荐请到《PRINCE CASPIAN》专题网址http://www.xiabook.com/waiguo/2126/ 
  



CHAPTER ONE

下 //书 /网
the island  once there were four children whose names were peter, susan, edmund, and  lucy, and it has been told in another book called the lion, the witch and the  wardrobe how they had a remarkable adventure. they had opened the door of a magic wardrobe  and found themselves in a quite different world from ours, and in that different  world they had become kings and queens in a country called narnia. while they were in  narnia they seemed to reign for years and years; but when they came back through the  door and found themselves in england again, it all seemed to have taken no time at  all. at any rate, no one noticed that they had ever been away, and they never told anyone  except one very wise grown-up.
that had all happened a year ago, and now all four of them were sitting on  a seat at a railway station with trunks and playboxes piled up round them. they were,  in fact, on their way back to school. they had travelled together as far as this  station, which was a junction; and here, in a few minutes, one train would arrive and take the  girls away to one school, and in about half an hour another train would arrive and the boys  would go off to another school. the first part of the journey, when they were all together,  always seemed to be part of the holidays; but now when they would be saying good-bye and  going different ways so soon, everyone felt that the holidays were really over  and everyone felt their term-time feelings beginning again, and they were all rather gloomy  and no one could think of anything to say. lucy was going to boarding school for the  first time.
it was an empty, sleepy, country station and there was hardly anyone on the  platform except themselves. suddenly lucy gave a sharp little cry, like someone who  has been stung by a wasp.
"whats up, lu?" said edmund - and then suddenly broke off and made a noise  like "ow!”
"what on earth-",began peter, and then he too suddenly changed what he had  been going to say. instead, he said, "susan, let go! what are you doing? where are you  dragging me to?”
"im not touching you," said susan. "someone is pulling me. oh - oh -oh - stop it!”
everyone noticed that all the others faces had gone very white.
"i felt just the same," said edmund in a breathless voice. "as if i were  being dragged along. a most frightful pulling-ugh! its beginning again.”
"me too," said lucy. "oh, i cant bear it.”
"look sharp!" shouted edmund. "all catch hands and keep together. this is  magic - i can tell by the feeling. quick!”
"yes," said susan. "hold hands. oh, i do wish it would stop-oh!”
next moment the luggage, the seat, the platform, and the station had  completely vanished. the four children, holding hands and panting, found themselves  standing in a woody place - such a woody place that branches were sticking into them and  there was hardly room to move. they all rubbed their eyes and took a deep breath.
"oh, peter!" exclaimed lucy. "do you think we can possibly have got back to  narnia?”
"it might be anywhere," said peter. "i cant see a yard in all these trees.  lets try to get into the open - if there is any open.”
with some difficulty, and with some stings from nettles and pricks from  thorns, they struggled out of the thicket. then they had another surprise. everything  became much brighter, and after a few steps they found themselves at the edge of the  wood, looking down on a sandy beach. a few yards away a very calm sea was falling on the  sand with such tiny ripples that it made hardly any sound. there was no land in sight  and no clouds in the sky. the sun was about where it ought to be at ten oclock in the  morning, and the sea was a dazzling blue. they stood sniffing in the sea-smell.
"by jove!" said peter. "this is good enough.”
five minutes later everyone was barefooted and wading in the cool clear  water.
"this is better than being in a stuffy train on the way back to latin and  french and algebra!" said edmund. and then for quite a long time there was no more  talking, only splashing and looking for shrimps and crabs.
"all the same," said susan presently, "i suppose well have to make some  plans. we shall want something to eat before long.”
"weve got the sandwiches mother gave us for the journey," said edmund. "at  least ive got mine.”
"not me," said lucy. "mine were in my little bag.”
"so were mine," said susan.
"mine are in my coat-pocket, there on the beach," said peter. "thatll be  two lunches among four. this isnt going to be such fun.”
"at present," said lucy, "i want something to drink more than something to  eat.”
everyone else now felt thirsty, as one usually is after wading in salt  water under a hot sun.
"its like being shipwrecked," remarked edmund. "in the books they always  find springs of clear, fresh water on the island. wed better go and look for them.”
"does that mean we have to go back into all that thick wood?" said susan.
"not a bit of it," said peter. "if there are streams theyre bound to come  down to the sea, and if we walk along the beach were bound to come to them.”
they all now waded back and went first across the smooth, wet sand and then  up to the dry, crumbly sand that sticks to ones toes, and began putting on their  shoes and socks.
edmund and lucy wanted to leave them behind and do their exploring with  bare feet, but susan said this would be a mad thing to do. "we might never find them  again," she pointed out, "and we shall want them if were still here when night comes  and it begins to be cold.”
when they were dressed again they set out along the shore with the sea on  their left hand and the wood on their right. except for an occasional seagull it was a very  quiet place.
the wood was so thick and tangled that they could hardly see into it at  all; and nothing in it moved - not a bird, not even an insect.
shells and seaweed and anemones, or tiny crabs in rockpools, are all very  well, but you soon get tired of them if you are thirsty. the childrens feet, after the  change from the cool water, felt hot and heavy. susan and lucy had raincoats to carry.  edmund had put down his coat on the station seat just before the magic overtook them, and  he and peter took it in turns to carry peters great-coat.
presently the shore began to curve round to the right. about quarter of an  hour later, after they had crossed a rocky ridge which ran out into a point, it made quite a  sharp turn.
their backs were now to the part of the sea which had met them when they  first came out of the wood, and now, looking ahead, they could see across the water  another shore, thickly wooded like the one they were exploring.
"i wonder, is that an island or do we join on to it presently?" said lucy.
"dont know," said peter and they all plodded on in silence.
the shore that they were walking on drew nearer and nearer to the opposite  shore, and as they came round each promontory the children expected to find the place  where the two joined. but in this they were disappointed. they came to some rocks which  they had to climb and from the top they could see a fairway ahead and - "oh bother!"  said edmund, "its no good. we shant be able to get to those other woods at all. were  on an island!”
it was true. at this point the channel between them and the opposite coast  was only about thirty or forty yards wide; but they could now see that this was its  narrowest place. after that, their own coast bent round to the right again and they could see open  sea between it and the mainland. it was obvious that they had already come much more than  halfway round the island.
"look!" said lucy suddenly. "whats that?" she pointed to a long, silvery,  snake-like thing that lay across the beach.
"a stream! a stream!" shouted the others, and, tired as they were, they  lost no time in clattering down the rocks and racing to the fresh water. they knew that the  stream would be better to drink farther up, away from the beach, so they went at once to  the spot where it came out of the wood. the trees were as thick as ever, but the stream  had made itself a deep course between high mossy banks so that by stooping you could follow  it up in a sort of tunnel of leaves. they dropped on their knees by the first brown,  dimply pool and drank and drank, and dipped their faces in the water, and then dipped their  arms in up to the elbow.
"now," said edmund, "what about those sandwiches?”
"oh, hadnt we better have them?" said susan. "we may need them far worse  later on.”
"i do wish," said lucy, "now that were not thirsty, we could go on feeling  as not-hungry as we did when we were thirsty.”
"but what about those sandwiches?" repeated edmund. "theres no good saving  them till they go bad. youve got to remember its a good deal hotter here than in  england and weve been carrying them about in pockets for hours." so they got out the  two packets and divided them into four portions, and nobody had quite enough, but it  was a great deal better than nothing. then they talked about their plans for the next meal.  lucy wanted to go back to the sea and catch shrimps, until someone pointed out that they  had no nets.
edmund said they must gather gulls eggs from the rocks, but when they came  to think of it they couldnt remember having seen any gulls eggs and wouldnt be able  to cook them if they found any. peter thought to himself that unless they had some  stroke of luck they would soon be glad to eat eggs raw, but he didnt see any point in saying  this out loud.
susan said it was a pity they had eaten the sandwiches so soon. one or two  tempers very nearly got lost at this stage. finally edmund said:   
"look here. theres only one thing to be done. we must explore the wood.  hermits and knights-errant and people like that always manage to live somehow if  theyre in a forest.
they find roots and berries and things.”
"what sort of roots?" asked susan.
"i always thought it meant roots of trees," said lucy.
"come on," said peter, "ed is right. and we must try to do something. and  itll be better than going out into the glare and the sun again.”
so they all got up and began to follow the stream. it was very hard work.  they had to stoop under branches and climb over branches, and they blundered through  great masses of stuff like rhododendrons and tore their clothes and got their feet wet  in the stream; and still there was no noise at all except the noise of the stream and the  noises they were making themselves. they were beginning to get very tired of it when they  noticed a delicious smell, and then a flash of bright colour high above them at the  top of the right bank.
"i say!" exclaimed lucy. "i do believe thats an apple tree.”
it was. they panted up the steep bank, forced their way through some  brambles, and found themselves standing round an old tree that was heavy with large  yellowishgolden apples as firm and juicy as you could wish to see.
"and this is not the only tree," said edmund with his mouth full of apple.  "look there-and there.”
"why, there are dozens of them," said susan, throwing away the core of her  first apple and picking her second. "this must have been an orchard - long, long ago,  before the place went wild and the wood grew up.”
"then this was once an inhabited island," said peter.
"and whats that?" said lucy, pointing ahead.
"by jove, its a wall," said peter. "an old stone wall.”
pressing their way between the laden branches they reached the wall. it was  very old, and broken down in places, with moss and wallflowers growing on it, but it was  higher than all but the tallest trees. and when they came quite close to it they found  a great arch which must once have had a gate in it but was now almost filled up with the  largest of all the apple trees. they had to break some of the branches to get past, and  when they had done so they all blinked because the daylight became suddenly much  brighter. they found themselves in a wide open place with walls all round it. in here  there were no trees, only level grass and daisies, and ivy, and grey walls. it was a bright,  secret, quiet place,  
and rather sad; and all four stepped out into the middle of it, glad to be  able to straighten their backs and move their limbs freely.

 



CHAPTER TWO

　下 /书 /网　  　
the ancient treasure house  "this wasnt a garden," said susan presently. "it was a castle and this  must have been the courtyard.”
"i see what you mean," said peter. "yes. that is the remains of a tower.  and there is what used to be a flight of steps going up to the top of the walls. and look at  those other steps - the broad, shallow ones - going up to that doorway. it must have been the  door into the great hall.”
"ages ago, by the look of it," said edmund.
"yes, ages ago," said peter. "i wish we could find out who the people were  that lived in this castle; and how long ago.”
"it gives me a queer feeling," said lucy.
"does it, lu?" said peter, turning and looking hard at her. "because it  does the same to me. it is the queerest thing that has happened this queer day. i wonder  where we are and what it all means?”
while they were talking they had crossed the courtyard and gone through the  other doorway into what had once been the hall. this was now very like the  courtyard, for the roof had long since disappeared and it was merely another space of grass  and daisies, except that it was shorter and narrower and the walls were higher. across  the far end there was a kind of terrace about three feet higher than the rest.
"i wonder, was it really the hall?" said susan. "what is that terrace kind  of thing?”
"why, you silly," said peter (who had become strangely excited), "dont you  see? that was the dais where the high table was, where the king and the great lords  sat. anyone would think you had forgotten that we ourselves were once kings and queens  and sat on a dais just like that, in our great hall.”
"in our castle of cair paravel," continued susan in a dreamy and rather  sing-song voice, "at the mouth of the great river of narnia. how could i forget?”
"how it all comes back!" said lucy. "we could pretend we were in cair  paravel now.
this hall must have been very like the great hall we feasted in.”
"but unfortunately without the feast," said edmund. "its getting late, you  know. look how long the shadows are. and have you noticed that it isnt so hot?”
"we shall need a camp-fire if weve got to spend the night here," said  peter. "ive got matches. lets go and see if we can collect some dry wood.”
everyone saw the sense of this, and for the next halfhour they were busy.  the orchard through which they had first come into the ruins turned out not to be a  good place for firewood. they tried the other side of the castle, passing out of the hall  by a little side door into a maze of stony humps and hollows which must once have been  passages and smaller rooms but was now all nettles and wild roses. beyond this they  found a wide gap in the castle wall and stepped through it into a wood of darker and bigger  trees where they found dead branches and rotten wood and sticks and dry leaves and fir -cones in plenty. they went to and fro with bundles until they had a good pile on the  dais. at the fifth journey they found the well, just outside the hall, hidden in weeds,  but clean and fresh and deep when they had cleared these away.
the remains of a stone pavement ran half-way round it. then the girls went  out to pick some more apples and the boys built the fire, on the dais and fairly close  to the corner between two walls, which they thought would be the snuggest and warmest  place. they had great difficulty in lighting it and used a lot of matches, but they  succeeded in the end.
finally, all four sat down with their backs to the wall and their faces to  the fire. they tried roasting some of the apples on the ends of sticks. but roast apples  are not much good without sugar, and they are too hot to eat with your fingers till they  are too cold to be worth eating. so they had to content themselves with raw apples, which,  as edmund said, made one realize that school suppers werent so bad after all - "i  shouldnt mind a good thick slice of bread and margarine this minute," he added. but the  spirit of adventure was rising in them all, and no one really wanted to be back at  school.
shortly after the last apple had been eaten, susan went out to the well to  get another drink. when she came back she was carrying something in her hand.
"look," she said in a rather choking kind of voice. "i found it by the  well." she handed it to peter and sat down. the others thought she looked and sounded as if she  might be going to cry. edmund and lucy eagerly bent forward to see what was in  peters hand - a little, bright thing that gleamed in the firelight.
"well, im - im jiggered," said peter, and his voice also sounded queer.  then he handed it to the others.
all now saw what it was - a little chess-knight, ordinary in size but  extraordinarily heavy because it was made of pure gold; and the eyes in the horses head were two  tiny little rubies or rather one was, for the other had been knocked out.
"why!" said lucy, "its exactly like one of the golden chessmen we used to  play with when we were kings and queens at cair paravel.”
"cheer up, su," said peter to his other sister.
"i cant help it," said susan. "it brought back - oh, such lovely times.  and i remembered playing chess with fauns and good giants, and the mer-people singing in the  sea, and my beautiful horse - and - and -”
"now," said peter in a quite different voice, "its about time we four  started using our brains.”
"what about?" asked edmund.
"have none of you guessed where we are?" said peter.
"go on, go on," said lucy. "ive felt for hours that there was some  wonderful mystery hanging over this place.”
"fire ahead, peter," said edmund. "were all listening.”
"we are in the ruins of cair paravel itself," said peter.
"but, i say," replied edmund. "i mean, how do you make that out? this place  has been ruined for ages. look at all those big trees growing right up to the gates.  look at the very stones. anyone can see that nobody has lived here for hundreds of years.”
"i know," said peter. "that is the difficulty. but lets leave that out for  the moment. i want to take the points one by one. first point: this hall is exactly the same  shape and size as the hall at cair paravel. just picture a roof on this, and a coloured  pavement instead of grass, and tapestries on the walls, and you get our royal banqueting hall.”
no one said anything.
"second point," continued peter. "the castle well is exactly where our well  was, a little to the south of the great hall; and it is exactly the same size and shape.”
again there was no reply.
"third point: susan has just found one of our old chessmen - or something  as like one of them as two peas.”
still nobody answered.
"fourth point. dont you remember - it was the very day before the  ambassadors came from the king of calormen dont you remember planting the orchard outside  the north gate of cair paravel? the greatest of all the wood-people, pomona herself,  came to put good spells on it. it was those very decent little chaps the moles who did  the actual digging. can you have forgotten that funny old lilygloves, the chief mole,  leaning on his spade and saying, `believe me, your majesty, youll be glad of these fruit  trees one day. and by jove he was right.”
"i do! i do!" said lucy, and clapped her hands.
"but look here, peter," said edmund. "this must be all rot. to begin with,  we didnt plant the orchard slap up against the gate. we wouldnt have been such fools.”
"no, of course not," said peter. "but it has grown up to the gate since.”
"and for another thing," said edmund, "cair paravel wasnt on an island.”
"yes, ive been wondering about that. but it was a what-do-you-call-it, a  peninsula. jolly nearly an island. couldnt it have been made an island since our time?  somebody has dug a channel.”
"but half a moment!" said edmund. "you keep on saying since our time. but  its only a year ago since we came back from narnia. and you want to make out that in  one year castles have fallen down, and great forests have grown up, and little trees  we saw planted ourselves have turned into a big old orchard, and goodness knows what else.  its all impossible.”
"theres one thing," said lucy. "if this is cair paravel there ought to be  a door at this end of the dais. in fact we ought to be sitting with our backs against it at  this moment. you know - the door that led down to the treasure chamber.”
"i suppose there isnt a door," said peter, getting up.
the wall behind them was a mass of ivy.
"we can soon find out," said edmund, taking up one of the sticks that they  had laid ready for putting on the fire. he began beating the ivied wall. tap-tap went the  stick against the stone; and again, tap-tap; and then, all at once, boomboom, with a quite  different sound, a hollow, wooden sound.
"great scott!" said edmund.
"we must clear this ivy away," said peter.
"oh, do lets leave it alone," said susan. "we can try it in the morning.  if weve got to spend the night here i dont want an open door at my back and a great big  black hole that anything might come out of, besides the draught and the damp. and itll  soon be dark.”
"susan! how can you?" said lucy with a reproachful glance. but both the  boys were too much excited to take any notice of susans advice. they worked at the ivy  with their hands and with peters pocket-knife till the knife broke. after that they  used edmunds.
soon the whole place where they had been sitting was covered with ivy; and  at last they had the door cleared.
"locked, of course," said peter.
"but the woods all rotten," said edmund. "we can pull it to bits in no  time, and it will make extra firewood. come on.”
it took them longer than they expected and, before they had done, the great  hall had grown dusky and the first star or two had come out overhead. susan was not  the only one who felt a slight shudder as the boys stood above the pile of splintered  wood, rubbing the dirt off their hands and staring into the cold, dark opening they had made.
"now for a torch," said peter.
"oh, what is the good?" said susan. "and as edmund said -”
"im not saying it now," edmund interrupted. "i still dont understand, but  we can settle that later. i suppose youre coming down, peter?”
"we must," said peter. "cheer up, susan. its no good behaving like kids  now that we are back in narnia.
youre a queen here. and anyway no one could go to sleep with a mystery  like this on their minds.”
they tried to use long sticks as torches but this was not a success. if you  held them with the lighted end up they went out, and if you held them the other way they  scorched your hand and the smoke got in your eyes. in the end they had to use edmunds  electric torch; luckily it had been a birthday present less than a week ago and the battery  was almost new. he went first, with the light. then came lucy, then susan, and peter  brought up the rear.
"ive come to the top of the steps," said edmund.
"count them," said peter.
"one - two - three," said edmund, as he went cautiously down, and so up to  sixteen.
"and this is the bottom," he shouted back.
"then it really must be cair paravel," said lucy. "there were sixteen."  nothing more was said till all four were standing in a knot together at the foot of the  stairway. then edmund flashed his torch slowly round.
"o - o - o - oh!!" said all the children at once.
for now all knew that it was indeed the ancient treasure chamber of cair  paravel where they had once reigned as kings and queens of narnia. there was a kind of  path up the middle (as it might be in a greenhouse), and along each side at intervals  stood rich suits of armour, like knights guarding the treasures. in between the suits of  armour, and on each side of the path, were shelves covered with precious things -  necklaces and arm rings and finger rings and golden bowls and dishes and long tusks of ivory,  brooches and coronets and chains of gold, and heaps of unset stones lying piled anyhow  as if they were marbles or potatoes - diamonds, rubies, carbuncles, emeralds, topazes, and  amethysts.
under the shelves stood great chests of oak strengthened with iron bars and  heavily padlocked. and it was bitterly cold, and so still that they could hear  themselves breathing, and the treasures were so covered with dust that unless they had  realized where they were and remembered most of the things, they would hardly have known  they were treasures. there was something sad and a little frightening about the  place, because it all seemed so forsaken and long ago. that was why nobody said anything for at  least a minute.
then, of course, they began walking about and picking things up to look at.  it was like meeting very old friends. if you had been there you would have heard them  saying things like, "oh look! our coronation rings - do you remember first wearing this?  - why, this is the little brooch we all thought was lost - i say, isnt that the armour  you wore in the great tournament in the lone islands? - do you remember the dwarf making that for  me? - do you remember drinking out of that horn? - do you remember, do you  remember?”
but suddenly edmund said, "look here. we mustnt waste the battery:  goodness knows how often we shall need it. hadnt we better take what we want and get out  again?”
"we must take the gifts," said peter. for long ago at a christmas in narnia  he and susan and lucy had been given certain presents which they valued more than their  whole kingdom. edmund had had no gift, because he was not with them at the time.  (this was his own fault, and you can read about it in the other book.)
they all agreed with peter and walked up the path to the wall at the far  end of the treasure chamber, and there, sure enough, the gifts were still hanging.  lucys was the smallest for it was only a little bottle. but the bottle was made of  diamond instead of glass, and it was still more than half full of the magical cordial which  would heal almost every wound and every illness. lucy said nothing and looked very solemn as  she took her gift down from its place and slung the belt over her shoulder and once more  felt the bottle at her side where it used to hang in the old days. susans gift had been a  bow and arrows  
and a horn. the bow was still there, and the ivory quiver, full of  wellfeathered arrows, but - "oh, susan," said lucy. "wheres the horn?”
"oh bother, bother, bother," said susan after she had thought for a moment.  "i remember now. i took it with me the last day of all, the day we went hunting the  white stag. it must have got lost when we blundered back into that other place - england, i  mean.”
edmund whistled. it was indeed a shattering loss; for this was an enchanted  horn and, whenever you blew it, help was certain to come to you, wherever you were.
"just the sort of thing that might come in handy in a place like this,"  said edmund.
"never mind," said susan, "ive still got the bow." and she took it.
"wont the string be perished, su?" said peter.
but whether by some magic in the air of the treasure chamber or not, the  bow was still in working order. archery and swimming were the things susan was good at. in a  moment she had bent the bow and then she gave one little pluck to the string. it  twanged: a chirruping twang that vibrated through the whole room. and that one small  noise brought back the old days to the childrens minds more than anything that had  happened yet. all the battles and hunts and feasts came rushing into their heads together.
then she unstrung the bow again and slung the quiver at her side.
next, peter took down his gift - the shield with the great red lion on it,  and the royal sword. he blew, and rapped them on the floor, to get off the dust. he  fitted the shield on his arm and slung the sword by his side. he was afraid at first that it  might be rusty and stick to the sheath. but it was not so. with one swift motion he drew it  and held it up, shining in the torchlight.
"it is my sword rhindon," he said; "with it i killed the wolf." there was a  new tone in his voice, and the others all felt that he was really peter the high king  again. then, after a little pause, everyone remembered that they must save the battery.
they climbed the stair again and made up a good fire and lay down close  together for warmth. the ground was very hard and uncomfortable, but they fell asleep in  the end.

www、mdwenxue.com



CHAPTER THREE

　ｗｗｗ．lzuo wen．ｃｏｍ
the dwarf   
the worst of sleeping out of doors is that you wake up so dreadfully early.  and when you wake you have to get up because the ground is so hard that you are  uncomfortable.
and it makes matters worse if there is nothing but apples for breakfast and  you have had nothing but apples for supper the night before. when lucy had said - truly  enough that it was a glorious morning, there did not seem to be anything else nice to be  said. edmund said what everyone was feeling, "weve simply got to get off this island.”
when they had drunk from the well and splashed their faces they all went  down the stream again to the shore and stared at the channel which divided them from  the mainland.
"well have to swim," said edmund.
"it would be all right for su," said peter (susan had won prizes for  swimming at school).
"but i dont know about the rest of us." by "the rest of us" he really  meant edmund who couldnt yet do two lengths at the school baths, and lucy, who could hardly  swim at all.
"anyway," said susan, "there may be currents. father says its never wise  to bathe in a place you dont know.”
"but, peter," said lucy, "look here. i know i cant swim for nuts at home -  in england, i mean. but couldnt we all swim long ago - if it was long ago - when we were  kings and queens in narnia? we could ride then too, and do all sorts of things. dont  you think -?”
"ah, but we were sort of grown-up then," said peter.
"we reigned for years and years and learned to do things. arent we just  back at our proper ages again now?”
"oh!" said edmund in a voice which made everyone stop talking and listen to  him.
"ive just seen it all," he said.
"seen what?" asked peter.
"why, the whole thing," said edmund. "you know what we were puzzling about  last night, that it was only a year ago since we left narnia but everything  looks as if no one had lived in cair paravel for hundreds of years? well, dont you see? you  know that, however long we seemed to have lived in narnia, when we got back through  the wardrobe it seemed to have taken no time at all?”
"go on," said susan. "i think im beginning to understand.”
"and that means," continued edmund, "that, once youre out of narnia, you  have no idea how narnian time is going. why shouldnt hundreds of years have gone past  in narnia while only one year has passed for us in england?”
"by jove, ed," said peter. "i believe youve got it. in that sense it  really was hundreds of years ago that we lived in cair paravel. and now were coming back to  narnia just as if we were crusaders or anglo-saxons or ancient britons or someone coming back  to modern england?”
"how excited theyll be to see us -" began lucy, but at the same moment  everyone else said, "hush!" or "look!" for now something was happening.
there was a wooded point on the mainland a little to their right, and they  all felt sure that just beyond that point must be the mouth of the river. and now, round that  point there came into sight a boat. when it had cleared the point, it turned and began  coming along the channel towards them. there were two people on board, one rowing, the  other sitting in the stern and holding a bundle that twitched and moved as if it were  alive. both these people seemed to be soldiers. they had steel caps on their heads and light  shirts of chain-mail. their faces were bearded and hard. the children drew back from the  beach into the wood and watched without moving a finger.
"thisll do," said the soldier in the stern when the boat had come about  opposite to them.
"what about tying a stone to his feet, corporal?" said the other, resting  on his oars.
"garn!" growled the other. "we dont need that, and we havent brought one.  hell drown sure enough without a stone, as long as weve tied the cords right." with  these words he rose and lifted his bundle. peter now saw that it was really alive and was  in fact a dwarf, bound hand and foot but struggling as hard as he could. next moment he  heard a twang just beside his ear, and all at once the soldier threw up his arms,  dropping the dwarf into the bottom of the boat, and fell over into the water. he floundered away to  the far bank and peter knew that susans arrow had struck on his helmet. he turned and  saw that she was very pale but was already fitting a second arrow to the string. but it  was never used.
as soon as he saw his companion fall, the other soldier, with a loud cry,  jumped out of the boat on the far side, and lie also floundered through the water (which  was apparently just in his depth) and disappeared into the woods of the mainland.
"quick! before she drifts!" shouted peter. he and susan, fully dressed as  they were, plunged in, and before the water was up to their shoulders their hands were  on the side of the boat. in a few seconds they had hauled her to the bank and lifted the  dwarf out, and edmund was busily engaged in cutting his bonds with the pocket knife.  (peters sword would have been sharper, but a sword is very inconvenient for this sort of  work because you cant hold it anywhere lower than the hilt.) when at last the dwarf was  free, he sat up, rubbed his arms and legs, and exclaimed:  "well, whatever they say, you dont feel like ghosts.”
like most dwarfs he was very stocky and deep-chested. he would have been  about three feet high if he had been standing up, and an immense beard and whiskers of  coarse red hair left little of his face to be seen except a beak-like nose and  twinkling black eyes.
"anyway," he continued, "ghosts or not, youve saved my life and im  extremely obliged to you.”
"but why should we be ghosts?" asked lucy.
"ive been told all my life," said the dwarf, "that these woods along the  shore were as full of ghosts as they were of trees. thats what the story is. and thats why,  when they want to get rid of anyone, they usually bring him down here (like they were  doing with me)
and say theyll leave him to the ghosts. but i always wondered if they  didnt really drown em or cut their throats. i never quite believed in the ghosts. but those  two cowards youve just shot believed all right. they were more frightened of taking me  to my death than i was of going!”
"oh," said susan. "so thats why they both ran away.”
"eh? whats that?" said the dwarf.
"they got away," said edmund. "to the mainland.”
"i wasnt shooting to kill, you know," said susan. she would not have liked  anyone to think she could miss at such a short range.
"hm," said the dwarf. "thats not so good. that may mean trouble later on.  unless they hold their tongues for their own sake.”
"what were they going to drown you for?" asked peter.
"oh, im a dangerous criminal, i am," said the dwarf cheerfully. "but  thats a long story.
meantime, i was wondering if perhaps you were going to ask me to breakfast?  youve no idea what an appetite it gives one, being executed."   "theres only apples," said lucy dolefully.
"better than nothing, but not so good as fresh fish," said the dwarf. "it  looks as if ill have to ask you to breakfast instead. i saw some fishing tackle in that  boat. and anyway, we must take her round to the other side of the island. we dont want  anyone from the mainland coming down and seeing her.”
"i ought to have thought of that myself," said peter.
the four children and the dwarf went down to the waters edge, pushed off  the boat with some difficulty, and scrambled aboard. the dwarf at once took charge. the  oars were of course too big for him to use, so peter rowed and the dwarf steered them  north along the channel and presently eastward round the tip of the island. from here the  children could see right up the river, and all the bays and headlands of the coast beyond  it. they thought they could recognize bits of it, but the woods, which had grown up since  their time, made everything look very different.
when they had come round into open sea on the east of the island, the dwarf  took to fishing. they had an excellent catch of pavenders, a beautiful rainbow- coloured fish which they all remembered eating in cair paravel in the old days. when they  had caught enough they ran the boat up into a little creek and moored her to a tree.  the dwarf, who was a most capable person (and, indeed, though one meets bad dwarfs, i  never heard of a dwarf who was a fool), cut the fish open, cleaned them, and said:  "now, what we want next is some firewood.”
"weve got some up at the castle," said edmund.
the dwarf gave a low whistle. "beards and bedsteads!" he said. "so there  really is a castle, after all?”
"its only a ruin," said lucy.
the dwarf stared round at all four of them with a very curious expression  on his face.
"and who on earth - ?" he began, but then broke off and said, "no matter.  breakfast first.
but one thing before we go on. can you lay your hand on your hearts and  tell me im really alive? are you sure i wasnt drowned and were not all ghosts  together?”
when they had all reassured him, the next question was how to carry the  fish. they had nothing to string them on and no basket. they had to use edmunds hat in  the end because no one else had a hat. he would have made much more fuss about this  if he had not by now been so ravenously hungry.
at first the dwarf did not seem very comfortable in the castle. he kept  looking round and sniffing and saying, "hm. looks a bit spooky after all. smells like  ghosts, too." but he cheered up when it came to lighting the fire and showing them how to roast  the fresh pavenders in the embers. eating hot fish with no forks, and one pocket  knife between five people, is a messy business and there were several burnt fingers before the  meal was ended; but, as it was now nine oclock and they had been up since five,  nobody minded the burns so much as you might have expected. when everyone had finished  off with a drink from the well and an apple or so, the dwarf produced a pipe about the  size of his own arm, filled it, lit it, blew a great cloud of fragrant smoke, and said,  "now.”
"you tell us your story first," said peter. "and then well tell you ours.”
"well," said the dwarf, "as youve saved my life it is only fair you should  have your own way. but i hardly know where to begin. first of all im a messenger of king  caspians.”
"whos he?" asked four voices all at once.
"caspian the tenth, king of narnia, and long may he reign!" answered the  dwarf. "that is to say, he ought to be king of narnia and we hope he will be. at present  he is only king of us old narnians - “
"what do you mean by old narnians, please?" asked lucy.
"why, thats us," said the dwarf. "were a kind of rebellion, i suppose.”
"i see," said peter. "and caspian is the chief old narnian.”
"well, in a manner of speaking," said the dwarf, scratching his head. "but  hes really a new narnian himself, a telmarine, if you follow me.”
"i dont," said edmund.
"its worse than the wars of the roses," said lucy.
"oh dear," said the dwarf. "im doing this very badly. look here: i think  ill have to go right back to the beginning and tell you how caspian grew up in his uncles  court and how he comes to be on our side at all. but itll be a long story.”
"all the better," said lucy. "we love stories.”
so the dwarf settled down and told his tale. i shall not give it to you in  his words, putting in all the childrens questions and interruptions, because it would take  too long and be confusing, and, even so, it would leave out some points that the children  only heard later.
but the gist of the story, as they knew it in the end, was as follows.

wwＷ．7wenxue.com



CHAPTER FOUR

www.lzuowen.com
the dwarf tells of prince caspian  prince caspian lived in a great castle in the centre of narnia with his  uncle, miraz, the king of narnia, and his aunt, who had red hair and was called queen  prunaprismia.
his father and mother were dead and the person whom caspian loved best was  his nurse, and though (being a prince) he had wonderful toys which would do almost  anything but talk, he liked best the last hour of the day when the toys had all been put  back in their cupboards and nurse would tell him stories.
he did not care much for his uncle and aunt, but about twice a week his  uncle would send for him and they would walk up and down together for half an hour on the  terrace at the south side of the castle. one day, while they were doing this, the king  said to him,  "well, boy, we must soon teach you to ride and use a sword. you know that  your aunt and i have no children, so it looks as if you might have to be king when  im gone. how shall you like that, eh?”
"i dont know, uncle," said caspian.
"dont know, eh?" said miraz. "why, i should like to know what more anyone  could wish for!”
"all the same, i do wish," said caspian.
"what do you wish?" asked the king.
"i wish - i wish - i wish i could have lived in the old days," said  caspian. (he was only a very little boy at the time.)
up till now king miraz had been talking in the tiresome way that some  grown-ups have, which makes it quite clear that they are not really interested in what you  are saying, but now he suddenly gave caspian a very sharp look.
"eh? whats that?" he said. "what old days do you mean?”
"oh, dont you know, uncle?" said caspian. "when everything was quite  different. when all the animals could talk, and there were nice people who lived in the  streams and the trees. naiads and dryads they were called. and there were dwarfs. and there  were lovely little fauns in all the woods. they had feet like goats. and -”
"thats all nonsense, for babies," said the king sternly. "only fit for  babies, do you hear?
youre getting too old for that sort of stuff. at your age you ought to be  thinking of battles and adventures, not fairy tales.”
"oh, but there were battles and adventures in those days," said caspian.  "wonderful adventures. once there was a white witch and she made herself queen of the  whole country. and she made it so that it was always winter. and then two boys  and two girls came from somewhere and so they killed the witch and they were made kings  and queens of narnia, and their names were peter and susan and edmund and lucy.  and so they reigned for ever so long and everyone had a lovely time, and it was  all because of aslan -”
"whos he?" said miraz. and if caspian had been a very little older, the  tone of his uncles voice would have warned him that it would be wiser to shut up. but  he babbled on,  "oh, dont you know?" he said. "aslan is the great lion who comes from over  the sea.”
"who has been telling you all this nonsense?" said the king in a voice of  thunder.
caspian was frightened and said nothing.
"your royal highness," said king miraz, letting go of caspians hand, which  he had been holding till now, "i insist upon being answered. look me in the face.  who has been telling you this pack of lies?”
"n - nurse," faltered caspian, and burst into tears.
"stop that noise," said his uncle, taking caspian by the shoulders and  giving ham a shake.
"stop it. and never let me catch you talking - or thinking either - about  all those silly stories again. there never were those kings and queens. how could there be  two kings at the same time? and theres no such person as aslan. and there are no  such things as lions. and there never was a time when animals could talk. do you hear?”
"yes, uncle," sobbed caspian.
"then lets have no more of it," said the king. then he called to one of  the gentlemen-in-waiting who were standing at the far end of the terrace and said in a cold  voice, "conduct his royal highness to his apartments and send his royal highnesss nurse to  me at once.”
next day caspian found what a terrible thing he had done, for nurse had  been sent away without even being allowed to say good-bye to him, and he was told he was  to have a tutor.
caspian missed his nurse very much and shed many tears; and because he was  so miserable, he thought about the old stories of narnia far more than before.  he dreamed of dwarfs and dryads every night and tried very hard to make the dogs and cats  in the castle talk to him. but the dogs only wagged their tails and the cats only purred.
caspian felt sure that he would hate the new tutor, buy when the new tutor  arrived about a week later he turns out to be the sort of person it is almost  impossible not to like.
he was the smallest, and also the fattest, man caspian had ever seen. he  had a long, silvery, pointed beard which came down to his waist, and his face, which  was brown and covered with wrinkles, looked very wise, very ugly, and very kind. his  voice was grave and his eyes were merry so that, until you got to know him really well, it  was hard to know when he was joking and when he was serious. his name was doctor  cornelius.
of all his lessons with doctor cornelius the one that caspian liked best  was history. up till now, except for nurses stories, he had known nothing about the  history of narnia, and he was very surprised to learn that the royal family were newcomers in  the country.
"it was your highnesss ancestor, caspian the first," said doctor  cornelius, "who first conquered narnia and made it his kingdom. it was he who brought all your  nation into the country. you are not native narnians at all. you are all telmarines -  that is, you all came from the land of telmar, far beyond the western mountains. that is why  caspian the first is called caspian the conqueror.”
"please, doctor," asked caspian one day, "who lived in narnia before we all  came here out of telmar?”
"no men - or very few - lived in narnia before the telmarines took it,"  said doctor cornelius.
"then who did my great-great-grandcesters conquer?”
"whom, not who, your highness," said doctor cornelius. "perhaps it is time  to turn from history to grammar.”
"oh please, not yet!" said caspian.
"i mean, wasnt there a battle? why is he called caspian the conqueror if  there was nobody to fight with him?”
"i said there were very few men in narnia," said the doctor, looking at the  little boy very strangely through his great spectacles.
for a moment caspian was puzzled and then suddenly his heart gave a leap.  "do you mean," he gasped, "that there were other things? do you mean it was like in  the stories?
were there-?”
"hush!" said doctor cornelius, laying his head very close to caspians.  "not a word more. dont you know your nurse was sent away for telling you about old  narnia? the king doesnt like it. if he found me telling you secrets, youd be whipped  and i should have my head cut off.”
"but why?" asked caspian.
"1t is high time we turned to grammar now," said doctor cornelius in a loud  voice. "will your royal highness be pleased to open pulverulentus siccus at the fourth  page of his grammatical garden or the arbour of accidence pleasantlie opend to tender  wits?”
after that it was all nouns and verbs till lunchtime, but i dont think  caspian learned much. he was too excited. he felt sure that doctor cornelius would not have  said so much unless he meant to tell him more sooner or later.
in this he was not disappointed. a few days later his tutor said, "tonight  i am going to give you a lesson in astronomy. at dead of night two noble planets, tarva  and alambil, will pass within one degree of each other. such a conjunction has not  occurred for two hundred years, and your highness will not live to see it again. it will be  best if you go to bed a little earlier than usual. when the time of the conjunction draws  near i will come and wake you.”
this didnt seem to have anything to do with old narnia, which was what  caspian really wanted to hear about, but getting up in the middle of the night is always  interesting and he was moderately pleased. when he went to bed that night, he thought at  first that he would not be able to sleep; but he soon dropped off and it seemed only a  few minutes before he felt someone gently shaking him.
he sat up in bed and saw that the room was full of moonlight. doctor  cornelius, muffled in a hooded robe and holding a small lamp in his hand, stood by the  bedside.
caspian remembered at once what they were going to do. he got up and put on  some clothes. athough it was a summer night he felt colder than he had expected  and was quite glad when the doctor wrapped him in a robe like his own and gave him a pair  of warm, soft buskins for his feet. a moment later, both muffled so that they could  hardly be seen in the dark corridors, and both shod so that they made almost no noise,  master and pupil left the room.
caspian followed the doctor through many passages and up several  staircases, and at last, through a little door in a turret, they came out upon the leads. on  one side were the battlements, on the other a steep roof; below them, all shadowy and  shimmery, the castle gardens; above them, stars and moon. presently they came to another door,  which led into the great central tower of the whole castle: doctor cornelius unlocked it  and they began to climb the dark winding stair of the tower. caspian was becoming excited;  he had never been allowed up this stair before.
it was long and steep, but when they came out on the roof of the tower and  caspian had got his breath, he felt that it had been well worth it. away on his right  he could see, rather indistinctly, the western mountains. on his left was the gleam of the great  river, and everything was so quiet that he could hear the sound of the waterfall at  beaversdam, a mile away. there was no difficulty in picking out the two stars they had  come to see.
they hung rather low in the southern sky, almost as bright as two little  moons and very close together.
"are they going to have a collision?" he asked in an awestruck voice.
"nay, dear prince," said the doctor (and he too spoke in a whisper). "the  great lords of the upper sky know the steps of their dance too well for that. look well  upon them. their meeting is fortunate and means some great good for the sad realm of narnia.  tarva, the lord of victory, salutes alambil, the lady of peace. they are just coming  to their nearest.”
"its a pity that tree gets in the way," said caspian. "wed really see  better from the west tower, though it is not so high.”
doctor cornelius said nothing for about two minutes, but stood still with  his eyes fixed on tarva and alambil. then he drew a deep breath and turned to caspian.
"there," he said. "you have seen what no man now alive has seen, nor will  see again.
and you are right. we should have seen it even better from the smaller  tower. i brought you here for another reason.”
caspian looked up at him, but the doctors hood concealed most of his face.
"the virtue of this tower," said doctor cornelius, "is that we have six  empty rooms beneath us, and a long stair, and the door at the bottom of the stair is  locked. we cannot be overheard.”
"are you going to tell me what you wouldnt tell me the other day?" said  caspian.
"i am," said the doctor. "but remember. you and i must never talk about  these things except here - on the very top of the great tower.”
"no. thats a promise," said caspian. "but do go on, please.”
"listen," said the doctor. "all you have heard about old narnia is true. it  is not the land of men. it is the country of aslan, the country of the waking trees and  visible naiads, of fauns and satyrs, of dwarfs and giants, of the gods and the centaurs, of  talking beasts. it was against these that the first caspian fought. it is you  telmarines who silenced the beasts and the trees and the fountains, and who killed and  drove away the dwarfs and fauns, and are now trying to cover up even the memory of them.  the king does not allow them to be spoken of.”
"oh, i do wish we hadnt," said caspian. "and i am glad it was all true,  even if it is all over.”
"many of your race wish that in secret," said doctor cornelius.
"but, doctor," said caspian, "why do you say my race? after all, i suppose  youre a telmarine too.”
"am i?" said the doctor.
"well, youre a man anyway," said caspian.
"am i?" repeated the doctor in a deeper voice, at the same moment throwing  back his hood so that caspian could see his face clearly in the moonlight.
all at once caspian realized the truth and felt that he ought to have  realized it long before. doctor cornelius was so small, and so fat, and had such a very long  beard. two thoughts came into his head at the same moment. one was a thought of terror  - "hes not a real man, not a man at all, hes a dwarf, and hes brought me up here to  kill me." the other was sheer delight - "there are real dwarfs still, and ive seen one  at last.”
"so youve guessed it in the end," said doctor cornelius. "or guessed it  nearly right. im not a pure dwarf. i have human blood in me too. many dwarfs escaped in the  great battles and lived on, shaving their beards and wearing highheeled shoes and  pretending to be men. they have mixed with your telmarines. i am one of those, only a  halfdwarf, and if any of my kindred, the true dwarfs, are still alive anywhere in the  world, doubtless they would despise me and call me a traitor. but never in all these years  have we forgotten our own people and all the other happy creatures of narnia, and  the long-lost days of freedom.”
"im - im sorry, doctor," said caspian. "it wasnt my fault, you know.”
"i am not saying these things in blame of you, dear prince," answered the  doctor. "you may well ask why i say them at all. but i have two reasons. firstly,  because my old heart has carried these secret memories so long that it aches with them and would  burst if i did not whisper them to you. but secondly, for this: that when you become king  you may help us, for i know that you also, telmarine though you are, love the old  things.”
"i do, i do," said caspian. "but how can i help?”
"you can be kind to the poor remnants of the dwarf people, like myself. you  can gather learned magicians and try to find a way of awaking the trees once more. you  can search through all the nooks and wild places of the land to see if any fauns or  talking beasts or dwarfs are perhaps still alive in hiding.”
"do you think there are any?" asked caspian eagerly.
"i dont know - i dont know," said the doctor with a deep sigh. "sometimes  i am afraid there cant be. i have been looking for traces of them all my life.  sometimes i have thought i heard a dwarf-drum in the mountains. sometimes at night, in the  woods, i thought i had caught a glimpse of fauns and satyrs dancing a long way off;  but when i came to the place, there was never anything there. i have often despaired;  but something always happens to start me hoping again. i dont know. but at least you can  try to be a king like the high king peter of old, and not like your uncle.”
"then its true about the kings and queens too, and about the white witch?"  said caspian.
"certainly it is true," said cornelius. "their reign was the golden age in  narnia and the land has never forgotten them.”
"did they live in this castle, doctor?”
"nay, my dear," said the old man. "this castle is a thing of yesterday.  your great-great-grandfather built it. but when the two sons of adam and the two daughters  of eve were made kings and queens of narnia by aslan himself, they lived in the castle  of cair paravel. no man alive has seen that blessed place and perhaps even the  ruins of it have now vanished. but we believe it was far from here, down at the mouth of the  great river, on the very shore of the sea.”
"ugh!" said caspian with a shudder. "do you mean in the black woods? where  all the - the - you know, the ghosts live?”
"your highness speaks as you have been taught," said the doctor. "but it is  all lies.
there are no ghosts there. that is a story invented by the telmarines. your  kings are in deadly fear of the sea because they can never quite forget that in all  stories aslan comes from over the sea. they dont want to go near it and they dont want anyone  else to go near it. so they have let great woods grow up to cut their people off from  the coast. but because they have quarrelled with the trees they are afraid of the woods.  and because they are afraid of the woods they imagine that they are full of ghosts. and  the kings and great men, hating both the sea and the wood, partly believe these stories,  and partly encourage them. they feel safer if no one in narnia dares to go down to the  coast and look out to sea towards aslans land and the morning and the eastern end of  the world.”
there was a deep silence between them for a few minutes. then doctor  cornelius said, "come. we have been here long enough. it is time to go down and to bed.”
"must we?" said caspian. "id like to go on talking about these things for  hours and hours and hours.”
"someone might begin looking for us, if we did that," said doctor  cornelius.

 www.xiabook.com 



CHAPTER SIX

下 /书 /网
the people that lived in hiding  now began the happiest times that caspian had ever known. on a fine summer  morning when the dew lay on the grass he set off with the badger and the two  dwarfs, up through the forest to a high saddle in the mountains and down on to their sunny  southern slopes where one looked across the green wolds of archenland.
"we will go first to the three bulgy bears," said trumpkin.
they came in a glade to an old hollow oak tree covered with moss, and  trufflehunter tapped with his paw three times on the trunk and there was no answer. then  he tapped again and a woolly sort of voice from inside said, "go away. its not time  to get up yet.”
but when he tapped the third time there was a noise like a small earthquake  from inside and a sort of door opened and out came three brown bears, very bulgy indeed  and blinking their little eyes. and when everything had been explained to them  (which took a long time because they were so sleepy) they said, just as trufflehunter had  said, that a son of adam ought to be king of narnia and all kissed caspian - very wet,  snuffly kisses they were - and offered him some honey. caspian did not really want honey,  without bread, at that time in the morning, but he thought it polite to accept. it  took him a long time afterwards to get unsticky.
after that they went on till they came among tall beech trees and  trufflehunter called out, "pattertwig! pattertwig! pattertwig!" and almost at once, bounding down  from branch to branch till he was just above their heads, came the most magnificent red  squirrel that caspian had ever seen. he was far bigger than the ordinary dumb squirrels  which he had sometimes seen in the castle gardens; indeed he was nearly the size of a  terrier and the moment you looked in his face you saw that he could talk. indeed the  difficulty was to get him to stop talking, for, like all squirrels, he was a chatterer. he  welcomed caspian at once and asked if he would like a nut and caspian said thanks, he would.  but as pattertwig went bounding away to fetch it, trufflehunter whispered in  caspians ear, "dont look. look the other way. its very bad manners among squirrels to  watch anyone going to his store or to look as if you wanted to know where it was." then  pattertwig came back with the nut and caspian ate it and after that pattertwig asked  if he could take any messages to other friends. "for i can go nearly everywhere without  setting foot to ground," he said. trufflehunter and the dwarfs thought this a very good  idea and gave pattertwig messages to all sorts of people with queer names telling them  all to come to a  
feast and council on dancing lawn at midnight three nights ahead. "and  youd better tell the three bulgies too," added trumpkin. "we forgot to mention it to them.”
their next visit was to the seven brothers of shuddering wood. trumpkin led  the way back to the saddle and then down eastward on the northern slope of the  mountains till they came to a very solemn place among rocks and fir trees. they went very  quietly and presently caspian could feel the ground shake under his feet as if someone  were hammering down below. trumpkin went to a flat stone about the size of the  top of a water-butt, and stamped on it with his foot. after a long pause it was  moved away by someone or something underneath, and there was a dark, round hole with a  good deal of heat and steam coming out of it and in the middle of the hole the head of a  dwarf very like trumpkin himself. there was a long talk here and the dwarf seemed more  suspicious than the squirrel or the bulgy bears had been, but in the end the whole  party were invited to come down. caspian found himself descending a dark stairway into the  earth, but when he came to the bottom he saw firelight. it was the light of a furnace.  the whole place was a smithy. a subterranean stream ran past on one side of it. two  dwarfs were at the bellows, another was holding a piece of red-hot metal on the anvil with  a pair of tongs, a fourth was hammering it, and two, wiping their horny little hands  on a greasy cloth, were coming forward to meet the visitors. it took some time to  satisfy them that caspian was a friend and not an enemy, but when they did, they all cried,  "long live the king," and their gifts were noble - mail shirts and helmets and swords for  caspian and trumpkin and nikabrik. the badger could have had the same if he had liked,  but he said he was a beast, he was, and if his claws and teeth could not keep his skin  whole, it wasnt worth keeping. the workmanship of the arms was far finer than any caspian  had ever seen, and he gladly accepted the dwarf-made sword instead of his own, which  looked, in comparison, as feeble as a toy and as clumsy as a stick. the seven brothers  (who were all red dwarfs) promised to come to the feast at dancing lawn.
a little farther on, in a dry, rocky ravine they reached the cave of five  black dwarfs.
they looked suspiciously at caspian, but in the end the eldest of them  said, "if he is against miraz, well have him for king." and the next oldest said, "shall  we go farther up for you, up to the crags? theres an ogre or two and a hag that we could  introduce you to, up there.”
"certainly not," said caspian.
"i should think not, indeed," said trufflehunter. "we want none of that  sort on our side.”
nikabrik disagreed with this, but trumpkin and the badger overruled him. it  gave caspian a shock to realize that the horrible creatures out of the old  stories, as well as the nice ones, had some descendants in narnia still.
"we should not have aslan for friend if we brought in that rabble," said  trufflehunter as they came away from the cave of the black dwarfs.
"oh, aslan!" said trumpkin, cheerily but contemptuously. "what matters much  more is that you wouldnt have me.”
"do you believe in aslan?" said caspian to nikabrik.
"ill believe in anyone or anything," said nikabrik, "thatll batter these  cursed telmarine barbarians to pieces or drive them out of narnia. anyone or anything, aslan  or the white witch, do you understand?”
"silence, silence," said trufflehunter. "you do not know what you are  saying. she was a worse enemy than miraz and all his race.”
"not to dwarfs, she wasnt," said nikabrik.
their next visit was a pleasanter one. as they came lower down, the  mountains opened out into a great glen or wooded gorge with a swift river running at the  bottom. the open places near the rivers edge were a mass of foxgloves and wild roses and  the air was buzzing with bees. here trufflehunter called again, "glenstorm! glenstorm!"  and after a pause caspian heard the sound of hoofs. it grew louder till the valley  trembled and at last, breaking and trampling the thickets, there came in sight the noblest  creatures that caspian had yet seen, the great centaur glenstorm and his three sons. his flanks  were glossy chestnut and the beard that covered his broad chest was goldenred. he was a  prophet and a star-gazer and knew what they had come about.
"long live the king," he cried. "i and my sons are ready for war. when is  the battle to be joined?”
up till now neither caspian nor the others had really been thinking of a  war. they had some vague idea, perhaps, of an occasional raid on some human farmstead or  of attacking a party of hunters, if it ventured too far into these southern  wilds. but, in the main, they had thought only of living to themselves in woods and caves and  building up an attempt at old narnia in hiding. as soon as glenstorm had spoken  everyone felt much more serious.
"do you mean a real war to drive miraz out of narnia?" asked caspian.
"what else?" said the centaur. "why else does your majesty go clad in mail  and girt with sword?”
"is it possible, glenstorm?" said the badger.
"the time is ripe," said glenstorm. "i watch the skies, badger, for it is  mine to watch, as it is yours to remember. tarva and alambil have met in the halls of high  heaven, and on earth a son of adam has once more arisen to rule and name the creatures.  the hour has struck. our council at the dancing lawn must be a council of war." he spoke  in such a voice that neither caspian nor the others hesitated for a moment: it now  seemed to them quite possible that they might win a war and quite certain that they must  wage one.
as it was now past the middle of the day, they rested with the centaurs and  ate such food as the centaurs provided cakes of oaten meal, and apples, and herbs, and  wine, and cheese.
the next place they were to visit was quite near at hand, but they had to  go a long way round in order to avoid a region in which men lived. it was well into the  afternoon before they found themselves in level fields, warm between hedgerows. there  trufflehunter called at the mouth of a little hole in a green bank and out popped the  last thing caspian expected - a talking mouse. he was of course bigger than a common mouse,  well over a foot high when he stood on his hind legs, and with ears nearly as long as  (though broader than) a rabbits. his name was reepicheep and he was a gay and martial  mouse. he wore a tiny little rapier at his side and twirled his long whiskers as if they  were a moustache.
"there are twelve of us, sire," he said with a dashing and graceful bow,  "and i place all the resources of my people unreservedly at your majestys disposal."  caspian tried hard (and successfully) not to laugh, but he couldnt help thinking that  reepicheep and all his people could very easily be put in a washing basket and carried home on  ones back.
it would take too long to mention all the creatures whom caspian met that  day - clodsley shovel the mole, the three hardbiters (who were badgers like  trufflehunter), camillo the hare, and hogglestock the hedgehog. they rested at last beside a well at  the edge of a wide and level circle of grass, bordered with tall elms which now threw  long shadows across it, for the sun was setting, the daisies closing, and the rooks  flying home to bed.
here they supped on food they had brought with them and trumpkin lit his  pipe (nikabrik was not a smoker).
"now," said the badger, "if only we could wake the spirits of these trees  and this well, we should have done a good days work.”
"cant we?" said caspian.
"no," said trufflehunter. "we have no power over them. since the humans  came into the land, felling forests and defiling streams, the dryads and naiads have sunk  into a deep sleep. who knows if ever they will stir again? and that is a great loss to  our side. the telmarines are horribly afraid of the woods, and once the trees moved in  anger, our enemies would go mad with fright and be chased out of narnia as quick as  their legs could carry them.”
"what imaginations you animals have!" said trumpkin, who didnt believe in  such things. "but why stop at trees and waters? wouldnt it be even nicer if the  stones started throwing themselves at old miraz?”
the badger only grunted at this, and after that there was such a silence  that caspian had nearly dropped off to sleep when he thought he heard a faint musical sound  from the depth of the woods at his back. then he thought it was only a dream and  turned over again; but as soon as his ear touched the ground he felt or heard (it was  hard to tell which) a faint beating or drumming. he raised his head. the beating noise  at once  
became fainter, but the music returned, clearer this time. it was like  flutes. he saw that trufflehunter was sitting up staring into the wood. the moon was bright;  caspian had been asleep longer than he thought. nearer and nearer came the music, a  tune wild and yet dreamy, and the noise of many light feet, till at last, out from the  wood into the moonlight, came dancing shapes such as caspian had been thinking of all his  life. they were not much taller than dwarfs, but far slighter and more graceful. their  curly heads had little horns, the upper part of their bodies gleamed naked in the pale  light, but their legs and feet were those of goats.
"fauns!" cried caspian, jumping up, and in a moment they were all round  him. it took next to no time to explain the whole situation to them and they accepted  caspian at once.
before he knew what he was doing he found himself joining in the dance.  trumpkin, with heavier and jerkier movements, did likewise and even trufflehunter  hopped and lumbered about as best he could. only nikabrik stayed where he was, looking  on in silence. the fauns footed it all round caspian to their reedy pipes. their  strange faces, which seemed mournful and merry all at once, looked into his; dozens of  fauns, mentius and obentinus and dumnus, voluns, voltinus, girbius, nimienus, nausus, and  oscuns.
pattertwig had sent them all.
when caspian awoke next morning he could hardly believe that it had not all  been a dream; but the grass was covered with little cloven hoof-marks.

 



CHAPTER SEVEN

xiaoshuotxt
old narnia in danger  the place where they had met the fauns was, of course, dancing lawn itself,  and here caspian and his friends remained till the night of the great council. to  sleep under the stars, to drink nothing but well water and to live chiefly on nuts and wild  fruit, was a strange experience for caspian after his bed with silken sheets in a  tapestried chamber at the castle, with meals laid out on gold and silver dishes in the anteroom,  and attendants ready at his call. but he had never enjoyed himself more. never had sleep  been more refreshing nor food tasted more savoury, and he began already to harden and  his face wore a kinglier look.
when the great night came, and his various strange subjects came stealing  into the lawn by ones and twos and threes or by sixes and sevens - the moon then shining  almost at her full - his heart swelled as he saw their numbers and heard their greetings.  all whom he had met were there: bulgy bears and red dwarfs and black dwarfs, moles and  badgers, hares and hedgehogs, and others whom he had not yet seen - five satyrs as  red as foxes, the whole contingent of talking mice, armed to the teeth and following a  shrill trumpet, some owls, the old raven of ravenscaur. last of all (and this took  caspians breath away), with the centaurs came a small but genuine giant, wimbleweather of  deadmans  
hill, carrying on his back a basketful of rather sea-sick dwarfs who had  accepted his offer of a lift and were now wishing they had walked instead.
the bulgy bears were very anxious to have the feast first and leave the  council till afterwards: perhaps till tomorrow. reepicheep and his mice said that  councils and feasts could both wait, and proposed storming miraz in his own castle that very  night.
pattertwig and the other squirrels said they could talk and eat at the same  time, so why not have the council and feast all at once? the moles proposed throwing up entrenchments round the lawn before they did anything else. the fauns  thought it would be better to begin with a solemn dance. the old raven, while agreeing with  the bears that it would take too long to have a full council before supper, begged to  be allowed to give a brief address to the whole company. but caspian and the centaurs and  the dwarfs overruled all these suggestions and insisted on holding a real council of  war at once.
when all the other creatures had been persuaded to sit down quietly in a  great circle, and when (with more difficulty) they had got pattertwig to stop running to and  fro and saying "silence! silence, everyone, for the kings speech", caspian, feeling a  little nervous, got up. "narnians!" he began, but he never got any further, for at that very  moment camillo the hare said, "hush! theres a man somewhere near.”
they were all creatures of the wild, accustomed to being hunted, and they  all became still as statues. the beasts all turned their noses in the direction which  camillo had indicated.
"smells like man and yet not quite like man," whispered trufflehunter.
"its getting steadily nearer," said camillo.
"two badgers and you three dwarfs, with your bows at the - ready, go softly  off to meet it," said caspian.
"well settle un," said a black dwarf grimly, fitting a shaft to his  bowstring.
"dont shoot if it is alone," said caspian. "catch it.”
"why?" asked the dwarf.
"do as youre told," said glenstorm the centaur.
everyone waited in silence while the three dwarfs and two badgers trotted  stealthily across to the trees on the northwest side of the lawn. then came a sharp  dwarfish cry, "stop! who goes there?" and a sudden spring. a moment later a voice, which  caspian knew well, could he heard saying, "all right, all right, im unarmed. take  my wrists if you like, worthy badgers, but dont bite right through them. i want to  speak to the king.”
"doctor cornelius!" cried caspian with joy, and rushed forward to greet his  old tutor.
everyone else crowded round.
"pah!" said nikabrik. "a renegade dwarf. a half-and-halfer! shall i pass my  sword through its throat?”
"be quiet, nikabrik," said trumpkin. "the creature cant help its  ancestry.”
"this is my greatest friend and the saviour of my life," said caspian. "and  anyone who doesnt like his company may leave my army: at once. dearest doctor, i am  glad to see you again. how ever did you find us out?”
"by a little use of simple magic, your majesty," said the doctor, who was  still puffing and blowing from having walked so fast. "but theres no time to go into  that now. we must all fly from this place at once. you are already betrayed and miraz is  on the move.
before midday tomorrow you will be surrounded.”
"betrayed!" said caspian. "and by whom?”
"another renegade dwarf, no doubt," said nikabrik.
"by your horse destrier," said doctor cornelius. "the poor brute knew no  better. when you were knocked off, of course, he went dawdling back to his stable in the  castle. then the secret of your flight was known. i made myself scarce, having no wish  to be questioned about it in mirazs torture chamber. i had a pretty good guess  from my crystal as to where i should find you. but all day - that was the day before  yesterday - i saw mirazs tracking parties out in the woods. yesterday i learned that his  army is out. i dont think some of your - um - pure-blooded dwarfs have as much woodcraft as  might be expected. youve left tracks all over the place. great carelessness. at any  rate something has warned miraz that old narnia is not so dead as he had hoped, and he is  on the move.”
"hurrah!" said a very shrill and small voice from somewhere at the doctors  feet. "let them come! all i ask is that the king will put me and my people in the  front.”
"what on earth?" said doctor cornelius. "has your majesty got grasshoppers  - or mosquitoes - in your army?" then after stooping down and peering carefully  through his spectacles, he broke into a laugh.
"by the lion," he swore, "its a mouse. signior mouse, i desire your better  acquaintance.
i am honoured by meeting so valiant a beast.”
"my friendship you shall have, learned man," piped reepicheep. "and any  dwarf - or giant - in the army who does not give you good language shall have my sword  to reckon with.”
"is there time for this foolery?" asked nikabrik. "what are our plans?  battle or flight?”
"battle if need be," said trumpkin. "but we are hardly ready for it yet,  and this is no very defensible place.”
"i dont like the idea of running away," said caspian.
"hear him! hear him!" said the bulgy bears. "whatever we do, dont lets  have any running. especially not before supper; and not too soon after it neither.”
"those who run first do not always run last," said the centaur. "and why  should we let the enemy choose our position instead of choosing it ourselves? let us find  a strong place.”
"thats wise, your majesty, thats wise," said trufflehunter.
"but where are we to go?" asked several voices.
"your majesty," said doctor cornelius, "and all you variety of creatures, i  think we must fly east and down the river to the great woods. the telmarines hate that  region. they have always been afraid of the sea and of something that may come over the  sea. that is why they have let the great woods grow up. if traditions speak true, the  ancient cair paravel was at the river-mouth. all that part is friendly to us and hateful  to our enemies.
we must go to aslans how.”
"aslans how?" said several voices. "we do not know what it is.”
"it lies within the skirts of the great woods and it is a huge mound which  narnians raised in very ancient times over a very magical place, where there stood - and  perhaps still stands - a very magical stone. the mound is all hollowed out within into  galleries and caves, and the stone is in the central cave of all. there is room in the  mound for all our stores, and those of us who have most need of cover and are most accustomed  to underground life can be lodged in the caves. the rest of us can lie in the  wood. at a pinch all of us (except this worthy giant) could retreat into the mound itself,  and there we should be beyond the reach of every danger except famine.”
"it is a good thing we have a learned man among us," said trufflehunter;  but trumpkin muttered under his breath, "soup and celery! i wish our leaders would think  less about these old wives tales and more about victuals and arms." but all approved  of corneliuss proposal and that very night, half an hour later, they were on the march.  before sunrise they arrived at aslans how.
it was certainly an awesome place, a round green hill on top of another  hill, long since grown over with trees, and one little, low doorway leading into it. the  tunnels inside were a perfect maze till you got to know them, and they were lined and  roofed with smooth stones, and on the stones, peering in the twilight, caspian saw  strange characters and snaky patterns, and pictures in which the form of a lion was repeated  again and  
again. it all seemed to belong to an even older narnia than the narnia of  which his nurse had told him.
it was after they had taken up their quarters in and around the how that  fortune began to turn against them. king mirazs scouts soon found their new lair, and he  and his army arrived on the edge of the woods. and as so often happens, the enemy turned  out stronger than they had reckoned. caspians heart sank as he saw company after  company arriving.
and though mirazs men may have been afraid of going into the wood, they  were even more afraid of miraz, and with him in command they carried battle deeply  into it and sometimes almost to the how itself. caspian and other captains of course  made many sorties into the open country. thus there was fighting on most days and  sometimes by night as well; but caspians party had on the whole the worst of it.
at last there came a night when everything had gone as badly as possible,  and the rain which had been falling heavily all day had ceased at nightfall only to give  place to raw cold. that morning caspian had arranged what was his biggest battle yet,  and all had hung their hopes on it. he, with most of the dwarfs, was to have fallen on  the kings right wing at daybreak, and then, when they were heavily engaged, giant wimbleweather, with the centaurs and some of the fiercest beasts, was to  have broken out from another place and endeavoured to cut the kings right off from the  rest of the army. but it had all failed. no one had warned caspian (because no one in  these later days of  narnia remembered) that giants are not at all clever. poor wimbleweather,  though as brave as a lion, was a true giant in that respect. he had broken out at the  wrong time and from the wrong place, and both his party and caspians had suffered badly  and done the enemy little harm. the best of the bears had been hurt, a centaur terribly  wounded, and there were few in caspians party who had not lost blood. it was a gloomy  company that huddled under the dripping trees to eat their scanty supper.
the gloomiest of all was giant wimbleweather. he knew it was all his fault.  he sat in silence shedding big tears which collected on the end of his nose and then  fell off with a huge splash on the whole bivouac of the mice, who had just been beginning  to get warm and drowsy. they all jumped up, shaking the water out of their ears and  wringing their little blankets, and asked the giant in shrill but forcible voices whether  he thought they werent wet enough without this sort of thing. and then other people woke  up and told the mice they had been enrolled as scouts and not as a concert party, and asked  why they couldnt keep quiet. and wimbleweather tiptoed away to find some place  where he could be miserable in peace and stepped on somebodys tail and somebody (they  said afterwards it was a fox) bit him. and so everyone was out of temper.
but in the secret and magical chamber at the heart of the how, king  caspian, with cornelius and the badger and nikabrik and trumpkin, were at council. thick  pillars of ancient workmanship supported the roof. in the centre was the stone itself  - a stone table, split right down the centre, and covered with what had once been writing of  some kind: but ages of wind and rain and snow had almost worn them away in old times  when the  
stone table had stood on the hilltop, and the mound had not yet been built  above it. they were not using the table nor sitting round it: it was too magic a thing for  any common use. they sat on logs a little way from it, and between them was a rough  wooden table, on which stood a rude clay lamp lighting up their pale faces and throwing  big shadows on the walls.
"if your majesty is ever to use the horn," said trufflehunter, "i think the  time has now come." caspian had of course told them of his treasure several days ago.
"we are certainly in great need," answered caspian. "but it is hard to be  sure we are at our greatest. supposing there came an even worse need and we had already  used it?”
"by that argument," said nikabrik, "your majesty will never use it until it  is too late.”
"i agree with that," said doctor cornelius.
"and what do you think, trumpkin?" asked caspian.
"oh, as for me," said the red dwarf, who had been listening with complete  indifference, "your majesty knows i think the horn - and that bit of broken stone over  there and your great king peter - and your lion aslan - are all eggs in moonshine. its  all one to me when your majesty blows the horn. all i insist on is that the army is told  nothing about it. theres no good raising hopes of magical help which (as i think) are  sure to be disappointed.”
"then in the name of aslan we will wind queen susans horn," said caspian.
"there is one thing, sire," said doctor cornelius, "that should perhaps be  done first. we do not know what form the help will take. it might call aslan himself from  oversea. but i think it is more likely to call peter the high king and his mighty consorts  down from the high past. but in either case, i do not think we can be sure that the help  will come to this very spot -”
"you never said a truer word," put in trumpkin.
"i think," went on the learned man, "that they - or he will come back to  one or other of the ancient places of narnia. this, where we now sit, is the most ancient  and most deeply magical of all, and here, i think, the answer is likeliest to come.  but there are two others. one lantern waste, up-river, west of beaversdam, where the royal  children first appeared in narnia, as the records tell the other is down at the river- mouth, where their castle of cair paravel once stood. and if aslan himself comes, that would  be the best place for meeting him too, for every story says that he is the son of the  great emperor-over-the-sea, and over the sea he will pass. i should like very much to  send messengers to both places, to lantern waste and the river-mouth, to receive them - or  him or it.”
"just as i thought," muttered trumpkin. "the first result of all this  foolery is not to bring us help but to lose us two fighters.”
"who would you think of sending, doctor cornelius?" asked caspian.
"squirrels are best for getting through enemy country without being  caught," said trufflehunter.
"all our squirrels (and we havent many)," said nikabrik, "are rather  flighty. the only one id trust on a job like that would be pattertwig.”
"let it be pattertwig, then," said king caspian. "and who for our other  messenger? i know youd go, trufflehunter, but you havent the speed. nor you, doctor  cornelius.”
"i wont go," said nikabrik. "with all these humans and beasts about, there  must be a dwarf here to see that the dwarfs are fairly treated.”
"thimbles and thunderstorms!" cried trumpkin in a rage. "is that how you  speak to the king? send me, sire, ill go.”
"but i thought you didnt believe in the horn, trumpkin," said caspian.
"no more i do, your majesty. but whats that got to do with it? i might as  well die on a wild goose chase as die here. you are my king. i know the difference  between giving advice and taking orders. youve had my advice, and now its the time for  orders.”
"i will never forget this, trumpkin," said caspian. "send for pattertwig,  one of you. and when shall i blow the horn?”
"i would wait for sunrise, your majesty," said doctor cornelius. "that  sometimes has an effect in operations of white magic.”
a few minutes later pattertwig arrived and had his task explained to him.  as he was, like many squirrels, full of courage and dash and energy and excitement and  mischief (not to say conceit), he no sooner heard it than he was eager to be off. it was  arranged that he should run for lantern waste while trumpkin made the shorter journey to the  river-mouth. after a hasty meal they both set off with the fervent thanks and  good wishes of the king, the badger, and cornelius.

 



CHAPTER EIGHT

小?说?txt?天堂
how they left the island  
"and so," said trumpkin (for, as you have realized, it was he who had been  telling all this story to the four children, sitting on the grass in the ruined hall of  cair paravel) - "and so i put a crust or two in my pocket, left behind all weapons but my  dagger, and took to the woods in the grey of the morning. id been plugging away for  many hours when there came a sound that id never heard the like of in my born days.  eh, i wont forget that. the whole air was full of it, loud as thunder but far longer,  cool and sweet as music over water, but strong enough to shake the woods. and i said to  myself, `if thats not the horn, call me a rabbit. and a moment later i wondered why he  hadnt blown it sooner-”
"what time was it?" asked edmund.
"between nine and ten of the clock," said trumpkin.
"just when we were at the railway station!" said all the children, and  looked at one another with shining eyes.
"please go on," said lucy to the dwarf.
"well, as i was saying, i wondered, but i went on as hard as i could pelt.  i kept on all night - and then, when it was half light this morning, as if id no more  sense than a giant, i risked a short cut across open country to cut off a big loop of the  river, and was caught.
not by the army, but by a pompous old fool who has charge of a little  castle which is mirazs last stronghold towards the coast. i neednt tell you they got no  true tale out of me, but i was a dwarf and that was enough. but, lobsters and lollipops! it  is a good thing the seneschal was a pompous fool. anyone else would have run me through  there and then. but nothing would do for him short of a grand execution: sending me  down `to the ghosts in the full ceremonial way. and then this young lady", (he nodded at  susan) "does her bit of archery and it was pretty shooting, let me tell you - and here  we are. and without my armour, for of course they took that." he knocked out and  refilled his pipe.
"great scott!" said peter. "so it was the horn - your own horn, su - that  dragged us all off that seat on the platform yesterday morning! i can hardly believe it; yet  it all fits in.”
"i dont know why you shouldnt believe it," said lucy, "if you believe in  magic at all.
arent there lots of stories about magic forcing people out of one place -  out of one world - into another? i mean, when a magician in the arabian nights calls up a  jinn, it has to come. we had to come, just like that.”
"yes," said peter, "i suppose what makes it feel so queer is that in the  stories its always someone in our world who does the calling. one doesnt really think about  where the jinns coming from.”
"and now we know what it feels like for the jinn," said edmund with a  chuckle. "golly!
its a bit uncomfortable to know that we can be whistled for like that.  its worse than what father says about living at the mercy of the telephone.”
"but we want to be here, dont we," said lucy, "if aslan wants us?”
"meanwhile," said the dwarf, "what are we to do? i suppose id better go  back to king caspian and tell him no help has come.”
"no help?" said susan. "but it has worked. and here we are.”
"um - um - yes, to be sure. i see that," said the dwarf, whose pipe seemed  to be blocked (at any rate he made himself very busy cleaning it). "but- well - i mean -”
"but dont you yet see who we are?" shouted lucy. "you are stupid.”
"i suppose you are the four children out of the old stories," said  trumpkin. "and im very glad to meet you of course. and its very interesting, no doubt. but - no  offence?- and he hesitated again.
"do get on and say whatever youre going to say," said edmund.
"well, then - no offence," said trumpkin. "but, you know, the king and  trufflehunter and doctor cornelius were expecting - well, if you see what i mean, help.  to put it in another way, i think theyd been imagining you as great warriors. as it is  - were awfully fond of children and all that, but just at the moment, in the middle of a  war but im sure you understand.”
"you mean you think were no good," said edmund, getting red in the face.
"now pray dont be offended," interrupted the dwarf. "i assure you, my dear  little friends-”
"little from you is really a bit too much," said edmund, jumping up. "i  suppose you dont believe we won the battle of beruna? well, you can say what you like about  me because i know -”
"theres no good losing our tempers," said peter. "lets fit him out with  fresh armour and fit ourselves out from the treasure chamber, and have a talk after that.”
"i dont quite see the point -" began edmund, but lucy whispered in his  ear, "hadnt we better do what peter says? he is the high king, you know. and i think he  has an idea.”
so edmund agreed and by the aid of his torch they all, including trumpkin,  went down the steps again into the dark coldness and dusty splendour of the treasure  house.
the dwarfs eyes glistened as he saw the wealth that lay on the shelves  (though he had to stand on tiptoes to do so) and he muttered to himself, "it would never do  to let nikabrik see this; never." they found easily enough a mail shirt for him, a sword, a  helmet, a shield, a bow and quiverful of arrows, all of dwarfish size. the helmet was  of copper, set with rubies, and there was gold on the hilt of the sword: trumpkin had  never seen, much less carried, so much wealth in all his life. the children also put on mail  shirts and helmets; a sword and shield were found for edmund and a bow for lucy -  peter and susan were of course already carrying their gifts. as they came back up the  stairway, jingling in their mail, and already looking and feeling more like narnians  and less like schoolchildren, the two boys were behind, apparently making some plan. lucy  heard edmund say, "no, let me do it. it will be more of a sucks for him if i win,  and less of a let-down for us all if i fail.”
"all right, ed," said peter.
when they came out into the daylight edmund turned to the dwarf very  politely and said, "ive got something to ask you. kids like us dont often have the chance of  meeting a great warrior like you. would you have a little fencing match with me? it  would be frightfully decent.”
"but, lad," said trumpkin, "these swords are sharp.”
"i know," said edmund. "but ill never get anywhere near you and youll be  quite clever enough to disarm me without doing me any damage.”
"its a dangerous game," said trumpkin. "but since you make such a point of  it, ill try a pass or two.”
both swords were out in a moment and the three others jumped off the dais  and stood watching. it was well worth it. it was not like the silly fighting you see  with broad swords on the stage. it was not even like the rapier fighting which you sometimes  see rather better done. this was real broad-sword fighting. the great thing is to  slash at your enemys legs and feet because they are the part that have no armour. and  when he slashes at yours you jump with both feet off the ground so that his blow goes under  them. this gave the dwarf an advantage because edmund, being much taller, had to be  always stooping. i dont think edmund would have had a chance if he had fought  trumpkin twenty-four hours earlier. but the air of narnia had been working upon him  ever since they arrived on the island, and all his old battles came back to him, and  his arms and fingers remembered their old skill. he was king edmund once more. round and  round the two combatants circled, stroke after stroke they gave, and susan (who  never could learn to like this sort of thing) shouted out, "oh, do be careful." and  then, so quickly that no one (unless they knew, as peter did) could quite see how it happened,  edmund flashed his sword round with a peculiar twist, the dwarfs sword flew out of his  grip, and trumpkin was wringing his empty hand as you do after a "sting" from a  cricket-bat.
"not hurt, i hope, my dear little friend?" said edmund, panting a little  and returning his own sword to its sheath.
"i see the point," said trumpkin drily. "you know a trick i never learned.”
"thats quite true," put in peter. "the best swordsman in the world may be  disarmed by a trick thats new to him. i think its only fair to give trumpkin a chance  at something else.
will you have a shooting match with my sister? there are no tricks in  archery, you know.”
"ah, youre jokers, you are," said the dwarf. "i begin to see. as if i  didnt know how she can shoot, after what happened this morning. all the same, ill have a  try." he spoke gruffly, but his eyes brightened, for he was a famous bowman among his own  people.
all five of them came out into the courtyard.
"whats to be the target?" asked peter.
"i think that apple hanging over the wall on the branch there would do,"  said susan.
"thatll do nicely, lass," said trumpkin. "you mean the yellow one near the  middle of the arch?”
"no, not that," said susan. "the red one up above - over the battlement.”
the dwarfs face fell. "looks more like a cherry than an apple," he  muttered, but he said nothing out loud.
they tossed up for first shot (greatly to the interest of trumpkin, who had  never seen a coin tossed before) and susan lost. they were to shoot from the top of the  steps that led from the hall into the courtyard. everyone could see from the way the dwarf  took his position and handled his bow that he knew what he was about.
twang went the string. it was an excellent shot. the tiny apple shook as  the arrow passed, and a leaf came fluttering down. then susan went to the top of the  steps and strung her bow. she was not enjoying her match half so much as edmund had  enjoyed his; not because she had any doubt about hitting the apple but because  susan was so tenderhearted that she almost hated to beat someone who had been beaten  already. the dwarf watched her keenly as she drew the shaft to her ear. a moment later,  with a little soft thump which they could all hear in that quiet place, the apple fell to  the grass with susans arrow in it.
"oh, well done, su, " shouted the other children.
"it wasnt really any better than yours," said susan to the dwarf. "i think  there was a tiny breath of wind as you shot.”
"no, there wasnt," said trumpkin. "dont tell me. i know when i am fairly  beaten. i wont even say that the scar of my last wound catches me a bit when i get  my arm well back -”
"oh, are you wounded?" asked lucy. "do let me look.”
"its not a sight for little girls," began trumpkin, but then he suddenly  checked himself.
"there i go talking like a fool again," he said "i suppose youre as likely  to be a great surgeon as your brother was to be a great swordsman or your sister to be a  great archer.”
he sat down on the steps and took off his hauberk and slipped down his  little shirt, showing an arm hairy and muscular (in proportion) as a sailors though not  much bigger than a childs. there was a clumsy bandage on the shoulder which lucy  proceeded to unroll. underneath, the cut looked very nasty and there was a good deal of  swelling. "oh, poor trumpkin," said lucy. "how horrid." then she carefully dripped on to  it one single drop of the cordial from her flask.
"hullo. eh? what have you done?" said trumpkin. but however he turned his  head and squinted and whisked his beard to and fro, he couldnt quite see his own  shoulder. then he felt it as well as he could, getting his arms and fingers into very  difficult positions as you do when youre trying to scratch a place that is just out of reach.  then he swung his arm and raised it and tried the muscles, and finally jumped to his feet  crying, "giants and junipers! its cured! its as good as new." after that he burst into a  great laugh and said, "well, ive made as big a fool of myself as ever a dwarf did. no offence, i  hope? my humble duty to your majesties all -humble duty. and thanks for my life, my  cure, my breakfast - and my lesson.”
the children all said it was quite all right and not to mention it.
"and now," said peter, "if youve really decided to believe in us-”
"i have," said the dwarf.
"its quite clear what we have to do. we must join king caspian at once.”
"the sooner the better," said trumpkin. "my being such a fool has already  wasted about an hour.”
"its about two days journey, the way you came," said peter. "for us, i  mean. we cant walk all day and night like you dwarfs." then he turned to the others.  "what trumpkin calls aslans how is obviously the stone table itself. you remember it was  about half a days march, or a little less, from there down to the fords of beruna -”
"berunas bridge, we call it," said trumpkin.
"there was no bridge in our time," said peter. "and then from beruna down  to here was another day and a bit. we used to get home about teatime on the second day,  going easily. going hard, we could do the whole thing in a day and a half  perhaps.”
"but remember its all woods now," said trumpkin, "and there are enemies to  dodge.”
"look here," said edmund, "need we go by the same way that our dear little  friend came?”
"no more of that, your majesty, if you love me," said the dwarf.
"very well," said edmund. "may i say our d.l.f.?”
"oh, edmund," said susan. "dont keep on at him like that.”
"thats all right, lass - i mean your majesty," said trumpkin with a  chuckle. "a jibe wont raise a blister." (and after that they often called him the d.l.f. till  theyd almost forgotten what it meant.)
"as i was saying," continued edmund, "we neednt go that way. why shouldnt  we row a little south till we come to glasswater creek and row up it? that brings us  up behind the hill of the stone table, and well be safe while were at sea. if we start  at once, we can be at the head of glasswater before dark, get a few hours sleep, and be with  caspian pretty early tomorrow.”
"what a thing it is to know the coast," said trumpkin. "none of us know  anything about glasswater.”
"what about food?" asked susan.
"oh, well have to do with apples," said lucy. "do lets get on. weve done  nothing yet, and weve been here nearly two days.”
"and anyway, no ones going to have my hat for a fishbasket again," said  edmund.
they used one of the raincoats as a kind of bag and put a good many apples  in it. then they all had a good long drink at the well (for they would meet no more  fresh water till they landed at the head of the creek) and went down to the boat. the  children were sorry to leave cair paravel, which, even in ruins, had begun to feel like home  again.
"the d.l.f. had better steer," said peter, "and ed and i will take an oar  each. half a moment, though. wed better take off our mail: were going to be pretty  warm before were done. the girls had better be in the bows and shout directions to the  d.l.f. because he doesnt know the way. youd better get us a fair way out to sea till  weve passed the island.”
and soon the green, wooded coast of the island was falling away behind  them, and its little bays and headlands were beginning to look flatter, and the boat was  rising and falling in the gentle swell. the sea began to grow bigger around them and,  in the distance, bluer, but close round the boat it was green and bubbly.  everything smelled salt and there was no noise except the swishing of water and the clop-clop of  water against the sides and the splash of the oars and the jolting noise of the rowlocks.  the sun grew hot.
it was delightful for lucy and susan in the bows, bending over the edge and  trying to get their hands in the sea which they could never quite reach. the bottom,  mostly pure, pale sand but with occasional patches of purple seaweed, could be seen beneath  them.
"its like old times," said lucy. "do you remember our voyage to  terebinthia - and galma - and seven isles - and the lone islands?”
"yes," said susan, "and our great ship the splendour hyaline, with the  swans head at her prow and the carved swans wings coming back almost to her waist?”
"and the silken sails, and the great stern lanterns?”
"and the feasts on the poop and the musicians.”
"do you remember when we had the musicians up in the rigging playing flutes  so that it sounded like music out of the sky?”
presently susan took over edmunds oar and he came forward to join lucy.  they had passed the island now and stood closer in to the shore - all wooded and  deserted. they would have thought it very pretty if they had not remembered the time when  it was open and breezy and full of merry friends.
"phew! this is pretty gruelling work," said peter. "cant i row for a bit?"  said lucy. "the oars are too big for you," said peter shortly, not because he was cross but  because he had no strength to spare for talking.





CHAPTER 9

?小xiaoshuo说txt天堂
what lucy saw  susan and the two boys were bitterly tired with rowing before they rounded  the last headland and began the final pull up glasswater itself, and lucys head  ached from the long hours of sun and the glare on the water. even trumpkin longed for the  voyage to be over. the seat on which he sat to steer had been made for men, not dwarfs,  and his feet did not reach the floor-boards; and everyone knows how uncomfortable that  is even for  
ten minutes. and as they all grew more tired, their spirits fell. up till  now the children had only been thinking of how to get to caspian. now they wondered what  they would do when they found him, and how a handful of dwarfs and woodland creatures  could defeat an army of grown-up humans.
twilight was coming on as they rowed slowly up the windings of glasswater  creek - a twilight which deepened as the banks drew closer together and the  overhanging trees began almost to meet overhead. it was very quiet in here as the sound of  the sea died away behind them; they could even hear the trickle of the little streams  that poured down from the forest into glasswater.
they went ashore at last, far too tired to attempt lighting a fire; and  even a supper of apples (though most of them felt that they never wanted to see an apple  again) seemed better than trying to catch or shoot anything. after a little silent  munching they all huddled down together in the moss and dead leaves between four large beech  trees.
everyone  except lucy went to sleep at once. lucy, being far less tired,  found it hard to get comfortable. also, she had forgotten till now that all dwarfs snore.  she knew that one of the best ways of getting to sleep is to stop trying, so she opened her  eyes.
through a gap in the bracken and branches she could just see a patch of  water in the creek and the sky above it. then, with a thrill of memory, she saw again,  after all those years, the bright narnian stars. she had once known them better than the  stars of our own world, because as a queen in narnia she had gone to bed much later than as  a child in england. and there they were - at least, three of the summer constellations  could be seen from where she lay: the ship, the hammer, and the leopard. "dear old  leopard," she murmured happily to herself.
instead of getting drowsier she was getting more awake - with an odd,  night-time, dreamish kind of wakefulness. the creek was growing brighter. she knew now  that then moon was on it, though she couldnt see the moon. and now she began to feel  that the whole forest was coming awake like herself. hardly knowing why she did it,  she got up quickly and walked a little distance away from their bivouac.
"this is lovely," said lucy to herself. it was cool and fresh, delicious  smells were floating everywhere.
somewhere close by she heard the twitter of a nightingale beginning to  sing, then stopping, then beginning again. it was a little lighter ahead. she went  towards the light and came to a place where there were fewer trees, and whole patches or  pools of moonlight, but the moonlight and the shadows so mixed that you could hardly  be sure where anything was or what it was. at the same moment the nightingale,  satisfied at last with his tuning up, burst into full song.
lucys eyes began to grow accustomed to the light, and she saw the trees  that were nearest her more distinctly. a great longing for the old days when the  trees could talk in  
narnia came over her. she knew exactly how each of these trees would talk  if only she could wake them, and what sort of human form it would put on. she looked at  a silver birch: it would have a soft, showery voice and would look like a slender  girl, with hair blown all about her face, and fond of dancing. she looked at the oak: he  would be a wizened, but hearty old man with a frizzled beard and warts on his face and  hands, and hair growing out of the warts. she looked at the beech under which she was  standing. ah!
she would be the best of all. she would be a gracious goddess, smooth and  stately, the lady of the wood.
"oh, trees, trees, trees," said lucy (though she had not been intending to  speak at all).
"oh, trees, wake, wake, wake. dont you remember it? dont you remember me?  dryads and hamadryads, come out, come to me.”
though there was not a breath of wind they all stirred about her. the  rustling noise of the leaves was almost like words. the nightingale stopped singing as if to  listen to it.
lucy felt that at any moment she would begin to understand what the trees  were trying to say. but the moment did not come. the rustling died away. the nightingale  resumed its song. even in the moonlight the wood looked more ordinary again. yet lucy  had the feeling (as you sometimes have when you are trying to remember a name or a  date and almost get it, but it vanishes before you really do) that she had just  missed something: as if she had spoken to the trees a split second too soon or a split second  too late, or used all the right words except one, or put in one word that was just wrong.
quite suddenly she began to feel tired. she went back to the bivouac,  snuggled down between susan and peter, and was asleep in a few minutes.
it was a cold and cheerless waking for them all next morning, with a grey  twilight in the wood (for the sun had not yet risen) and everything damp and dirty.
"apples, heigh-ho," said trumpkin with a rueful grin. "i must say you  ancient kings and queens dont overfeed your courtiers!”
they stood up and shook themselves and looked about. the trees were thick  and they could see no more than a few yards in any direction.
"i suppose your majesties know the way all right?" said the dwarf.
"i dont," said susan. "ive never seen these woods in my life before. in  fact i thought all along that we ought to have gone by the river.”
"then i think you might have said so at the time," answered peter, with  pardonable sharpness.
"oh, dont take any notice of her," said edmund. "she always is a wet  blanket. youve got that pocket compass of yours, peter, havent you? well, then, were as  right as rain. weve  
only got to keep on going north-west - cross that little river, the what- do-you-call-it? - the rush -”
"i know," said peter. "the one that joins the big river at the fords of  beruna, or berunas bridge, as the d.l.f. calls it.”
"thats right. cross it and strike uphill, and well be at the stone table  (aslans how, i mean) by eight or nine oclock. i hope king caspian will give us a good  breakfast!”
"i hope youre right," said susan. "i cant remember all that at all.”
"thats the worst of girls," said edmund to peter and the dwarf. "they  never carry a map in their heads.”
"thats because our heads have something inside them," said lucy.
at first things seemed to be going pretty well. they even -thought they had  struck an old path; but if you know anything about woods, you will know that one is  always finding imaginary paths. they disappear after about five minutes and then you think  you have found another (and hope it is not another but more of the same one) and it  also disappears, and after you have been well lured out of your right direction  you realize that none of them were pats at all. the boys and the dwarf, however, were used  to woods and were not taken in for more than a few seconds.
they had plodded on for about half an hour (three of them very stiff from  yesterdays rowing) when trumpkin suddenly whispered, "stop." they all stopped.  "theres something following us," he said in a low voice. "or rather, something  keeping up with us: over there on the left." they all stood still, listening and staring  till their ears and eyes ached. "you and id better each have an arrow on the string," said susan to  trumpkin.
the dwarf nodded, and when both bows were ready for action the party went  on again.
they went a few dozen yards through fairly open woodland, keeping a sharp  look-out.
then they came to a place where the undergrowth thickened and they had to  pass nearer to it. just as they were passing the place, there came a sudden something  that snarled and flashed, rising out from the breaking twigs like a thunderbolt. lucy was  knocked down and winded, hearing the twang of a bowstring as she fell. when she was able  to take notice of things again, she saw a great grim-looking grey bear lying dead  with trumpkins arrow in its side.
"the d.l.f. beat you in that shooting match, su," said #peter, with a  slightly forced smile. even he had been shaken by this adventure.
"i - i left it too late," said susan, in an embarrassed voice. "i was so  afraid it might be, you know - one of our kind of bears, a talking bear." she hated killing  things.
"thats the trouble of it," said trumpkin, "when most of the beasts have  gone enemy and gone dumb, but there are still some of the other kind left. you never know,  and you darent wait to see.”
"poor old bruin," said susan. "you dont think he was?”
"not he," said the dwarf. "i saw the face and i heard the snarl. he only  wanted little girl for his breakfast. and talking of breakfast, i didnt want to discourage  your majesties when you said you hoped king caspian would give you a good one: but meats  precious scarce in camp. and theres good eating on a bear. it would be a shame to  leave the carcass without taking a bit, and it wont delay us more than half an hour.  i dare say you two youngsters - kings, i should say - know how to skin a bear?”
"lets go and sit down a fair way off," said susan to lucy. "i know what a  horrid messy business that will be." lucy shuddered and nodded. when they had sat down  she said: "such a horrible idea has come into my head, su. “
"whats that?”
"wouldnt it be dreadful if some day, in our own world, at home, men  started going wild inside, like the animals here, and still looked like men, so that youd  never know which were which?”
"weve got enough to bother about here and now in narnia," said the  practical susan, "without imagining things like that.”
when they rejoined the boys and the dwarf, as much as they thought they  could carry of the best meat had been cut off. raw meat is not a nice thing to fill ones  pockets with, but they folded it up in fresh leaves and made the best of it. they were all  experienced enough to know that they would feel quite differently about these squashy  and unpleasant parcels when they had walked long enough to be really hungry.
on they trudged again (stopping to wash three pairs of hands that needed it  in the first stream they passed) until the sun rose and the birds began to sing, and  more flies than they wanted were buzzing in the bracken. the stiffness from yesterdays  rowing began to wear off. everybodys spirits rose. the sun grew warmer and they took their  helmets off and carried them.
"i suppose we are going right?" said edmund about an hour later.
"i dont see how we can go wrong as long as we dont bear too much to the  left," said peter. "if we bear too much to the right, the worst that can happen is  wasting a little time by striking the great river too soon and not cutting off the corner.”
and again they trudged on with no sound except the thud of their feet and  the jingle of their chain shirts.
"wheres this bally rush got to?" said edmund a good deal later.
"i certainly thought wed have struck it by now," said peter. "but theres  nothing to do but keep on." they both knew that the dwarf was looking anxiously at them, but  he said nothing.
and still they trudged on and their mail shirts began to feel very hot and  heavy.
"what on earth?" said peter suddenly.
they had come, without seeing it, almost to the edge of a small precipice  from which they looked down into a gorge with a river at the bottom. on the far side  the cliffs rose much higher. none of the party except edmund (and perhaps trumpkin) was a  rock climber.
"im sorry," said peter. "its my fault for coming this way. were lost.  ive never seen this place in my life before.”
the dwarf gave a low whistle between his teeth.
"oh, do lets go back and go the other way," said susan. "i knew all along  wed get lost in these woods.”
"susan!" said lucy, reproachfully, "dont nag at peter like that. its so  rotten, and hes doing all he can.”
"and dont you snap at su like that, either," said edmund. "i think shes  quite right.”
"tubs and tortoiseshells!" exclaimed trumpkin. "if weve got lost coming,  what chance have we of finding our way back? and if were to go back to the island and  begin all over again - even supposing we could - we might as well give the whole thing up.  miraz will have finished with caspian before we get there at that rate.”
"you think we ought to go on?" said lucy.
"im not sure the high king is lost," said trumpkin. "whats to hinder this  river being the rush?”
"because the rush is not in a gorge," said peter, keeping his temper with  some difficulty.
"your majesty says is," replied the dwarf, "but oughtnt you to say was?  you knew this country hundreds - it may be a thousand - years ago. maynt it have  changed? a landslide might have pulled off half the side of that hill, leaving bare rock, and  there are your precipices beyond the gorge. then the rush might go on deepening its course  year after  
year till you get the little precipices this side. or there might have been  an earthquake, or anything.”
"i never thought of that," said peter.
"and anyway," continued trumpkin, "even if this is not the rush, its  flowing roughly north and so it must fall into the great river anyway. i think i passed  something that might have been it, on my way down. so if we go downstream, to our right,  well hit the great river. perhaps not so high as wed hoped, but at least well be no  worse off than if youd come my way.”
"trumpkin, youre a brick," said peter. "come on, then. down this side of  the gorge.”
"look! look! look!" cried lucy.
"where? what?" said everyone.
"the lion," said lucy. "aslan himself. didnt you see?" her face had  changed completely and her eyes shone.
"do you really mean -?" began peter.
"where did you think you saw him?" asked susan.
"dont talk like a grown-up," said lucy, stamping her foot. "i didnt think  i saw him. i saw him.”
"where, lu?" asked peter.
"right up there between those mountain ashes. no, this side of the gorge.  and up, not down. just the opposite of the way you want to go. and he wanted us to go  where he was - up there.”
"how do you know that was what he wanted?" asked edmund.
"he - i - i just know," said lucy, "by his face.”
the others all looked at each other in puzzled silence.
"her majesty may well have seen a lion," put in trumpkin. "there are lions  in these woods, ive been told. but it neednt have been a friendly and talking lion  any more than the bear was a friendly and talking bear.”
"oh, dont be so stupid," said lucy. "do you think i dont know aslan when  i see him?”
"hed be a pretty elderly lion by now," said trumpkin, "if hes one you  knew when you were here before! and if it could be the same one, whats to prevent him  having gone wild and witless like so many others?”
lucy turned crimson and i think she would have flown at trumpkin, if peter  had not laid his hand on her arm. "the d.l.f. doesnt understand. how could he? you must  just take it, trumpkin, that we do really know about aslan; a little bit about him, i  mean. and you mustnt talk about him like that again. it isnt lucky for one thing: and  its all nonsense for another. the only question is whether aslan was really there.”
"but i know he was," said lucy, her eyes filling with tears.
"yes, lu, but we dont, you see," said peter.
"theres nothing for it but a vote," said edmund.
"all right," replied peter. "youre the eldest, d.l.f. what do you vote  for? up or down?”
"down," said the dwarf. "i know nothing about aslan. but i do know that if  we turn left and follow the gorge up, it might lead us all day before we found a place  where we could cross it. whereas if we turn right and go down, were bound to reach the  great river in about a couple of hours. and if there are any real lions about, we want to  go away from them, not towards them.”
"what do you say, susan?”
"dont be angry, lu," said susan, "but i do think we should go down. im  dead tired. do lets get out of this wretched wood into the open as quick as we can. and  none of us except you saw anything.”
"edmund?" said peter.
"well, theres just this," said edmund, speaking quickly and turning a  little red. "when we first discovered narnia a year ago - or a thousand years ago, whichever  it is - it was lucy who discovered it first and none of us would believe her. i was the  worst of the lot, i know. yet she was right after all. wouldnt it be fair to believe her  this time? i vote for going up.”
"oh, ed!" said lucy and seized his hand.
"and now its your turn, peter," said susan, "and i do hope -”
"oh, shut up, shut up and let a chap think," interrupted peter. "id much  rather not have to vote. “
"youre the high king," said trumpkin sternly.
"down," said peter after a long pause. "i know lucy may be right after all,  but i cant help it. we must do one or the other.”
so they set off to their right along the edge, downstream. and lucy came  last of the party, crying bitterly.

www.xiabook.com



CHAPTER TEN

?小xiaoshuo说txt天堂
the return of the lion  to keep along the edge of the gorge was not so easy as it had looked.  before they had gone many yards they were confronted with young fir woods growing on the  very edge, and after they had tried to go through these, stooping and pushing for  about ten minutes, they realized that, in there, it would take them an hour to do half a mile.  so they came back and out again and decided to go round the fir wood. this took them  much farther to their right than they wanted to go, far out of sight of the cliffs and out  of sound of the river, till they began to be afraid they had lost it altogether. nobody  knew the time, but it was getting to the hottest part of the day.
when they were able at last to go back to the edge of the gorge (nearly a  mile below the point from which they had started) they found the cliffs on their side of  it a good deal lower and more broken. soon they found a way down into the gorge and  continued the journey at the rivers edge. but first they had a rest and a long drink. no  one was talking any more about breakfast, or even dinner, with caspian.
they may have been wise to stick to the rush instead of going along the  top. it kept them sure of their direction: and ever since the fir wood they had all been  afraid of being forced too far out of their course and losing themselves in the wood. it  was an old and pathless forest, and you could not keep anything like a straight course in  it. patches of hopeless brambles, fallen trees, boggy places and dense undergrowth would  be always getting in your way. but the gorge of the rush was not at all a nice place  for travelling either. i mean, it was not a nice place for people in a hurry. for an  afternoons ramble ending in a picnic tea it would have been delightful. it had everything you  could want on an occasion of that sort - rumbling waterfalls, silver cascades, deep,  amber-coloured pools, mossy rocks, and deep moss on the banks in which you could sink over  your ankles, every kind of fern, jewel-like dragon flies, sometimes a hawk  overhead and once (peter and trumpkin. both thought) an eagle. but of course what the  children and the dwarf wanted to see as soon as possible was the great river below them, and  beruna, and the way to aslans how.
as they went on, the rush began to fall more and more steeply. their  journey became more and more of a climb and less and less of a walk - in places even a  dangerous climb over slippery rock with a nasty drop into dark chasms, and the river  roaring angrily at the bottom.
you may be sure they watched the cliffs on their left eagerly for any sign  of a break or any place where they could climb them; but those cliffs remained cruel. it  was maddening, because everyone knew that if once they were out of the gorge on  that side, they would have only a smooth slope and a fairly short walk to caspians  headquarters.
the boys and the dwarf were now in favour of lighting a fire and cooking  their bear-meat. susan didnt want this; she only wanted, as she said, "to get on and  finish it and get out of these beastly woods". lucy was far too tired and miserable to have  any opinion about anything. but as there was no dry wood to be had, it mattered very  little what anyone thought. the boys began to wonder if raw meat was really as nasty as  they had always been told. trumpkin assured them it was.
of course, if the children had attempted a journey like this a few days ago  in england, they would have been knocked up. i think i have explained before how narnia  was altering them. even lucy was by now, so to speak, only one-third of a  little girl going to boarding school for the first time, and two-thirds of queen lucy of narnia.
"at last!" said susan.
"oh, hurray!" said peter.
the river gorge had just made a bend and the whole view spread out beneath  them. they could see open country stretching before them to the horizon and, between  it and them, the broad silver ribbon of the great river. they could see the specially  broad and shallow place which had once been the fords of beruna but was now spanned by a  long, many-arched bridge. there was a little town at the far end of it.
"by jove," said edmund. "we fought the battle of beruna just where that  town is!”
this cheered the boys more than anything. you cant help feeling stronger  when you look at a place where you won a glorious victory not to mention a kingdom,  hundreds of years ago. peter and edmund were soon so busy talking about the battle that they  forgot their sore feet and the heavy drag of their mail shirts on their shoulders. the  dwarf was interested too.
they were all getting on at a quicker pace now. the going became easier.  though there were still sheer cliffs on their left, the ground was becoming lower on  their right. soon it was no longer a gorge at all, only a valley. there were no more waterfalls  and presently they were in fairly thick woods again.
then - all at once - whizz, and a sound rather like the stroke of a  woodpecker. the children were still wondering where (ages ago) they had heard a sound just  like that and why they disliked it so, when trumpkin shouted, "down, at the same moment  forcing lucy (who happened to be next to him) flat down into the bracken. peter,  who had been looking up to see if he could spot a squirrel, had seen what it was - a  long cruel arrow had sunk into a tree trunk just above his head. as he pulled susan down and  dropped himself, another came rasping over his shoulder and struck the ground at his side.
"quick! quick! get back! crawl!" panted trumpkin.
they turned and wriggled along uphill, under the bracken amid clouds of  horribly buzzing flies. arrows whizzed round them. one struck susans helmet with a  sharp ping and glanced off. they crawled quicker. sweat poured off them. then they  ran, stooping nearly double. the boys held their swords in their hands for fear they  would trip them up.
it was heart-breaking work - all uphill again, back over the ground they  had already travelled. when they felt that they really couldnt run any more, even to  save their lives, they all dropped down in the damp moss beside a waterfall and behind a big  boulder, panting. they were surprised to see how high they had already got.
they listened intently and heard no sound of pursuit.
"so thats all right," said trumpkin, drawing a deep breath. "theyre not  searching the wood. only sentries, i expect. but it means that miraz has an outpost down  there. bottles and battledores! though, it was a near thing.”
"i ought to have my head smacked for bringing us this way at all," said  peter.
"on the contrary, your majesty," said the dwarf. "for one thing it wasnt  you, it was your royal brother, king edmund, who first suggested going by glasswater.”
"im afraid the d.l.f.s right," said edmund, who had quite honestly  forgotten this ever since things began going wrong.
"and for another," continued trumpkin, "if wed gone my way, wed have  walked straight into that new outpost, most likely; or at least had just the same  trouble avoiding it. i think this glasswater route has turned out for the best.”
"a blessing in disguise," said susan.
"some disguise!" said edmund.
"i suppose well have to go right up the gorge again now," said lucy.
"lu, youre a hero," said peter. "thats the nearest youve got today to  saying i told you so. lets get on.”
"and as soon as were well up into the forest," said trumpkin, "whatever  anyone says, im going to light a fire and cook supper. but we must get well away from  here.”
there is no need to describe how they toiled back up the gorge. it was  pretty hard work, but oddly enough everyone felt more cheerful. they were getting their  second wind; and the word supper had had a wonderful effect.
they reached the fir wood which had caused them so much trouble while it  was still daylight, and bivouacked in a hollow just above it. it was tedious  gathering the firewood; but it was grand when the fire blazed up and they began producing the damp  and smeary parcels of bear-meat which would have been so very unattractive to anyone  who had spent the day indoors. the dwarf had splendid ideas about cookery. each  apple (they still had a few of these) was wrapped up in bears meat - as if it was to be  apple dumpling with meat instead of pastry, only much thicker - and spiked on a sharp  stick and then roasted. and the juice of the apple worked all through the meat, like apple  sauce with roast pork. bear that has lived too much on other animals is not very nice,  but bear that has had plenty of honey and fruit is excellent, and this turned out to be  that sort of bear. it was a truly glorious meal. and, of course, no washing up - only lying back  and watching the smoke from trumpkins pipe and stretching ones tired legs and  chatting. everyone felt quite hopeful now about finding king caspian tomorrow and defeating  miraz in a few days. it may not have been sensible of them to feel like this, but they  did.
they dropped off to sleep one by one, but all pretty quickly.
lucy woke out of the deepest sleep you can imagine, with the feeling that  the voice she liked best in the world had been calling her name. she thought at first it  was her fathers voice, but that did not seem quite right. then she thought it was peters  voice, but that did not seem to fit either. she did not want to get up; not because she was  still tired - on the contrary she was wonderfully rested and all the aches had gone from her  bones - but because she felt so extremely happy and comfortable. she was looking  straight up at the narnian moon, which is larger than ours, and at the starry sky, for the  place where they had bivouacked was comparatively open.
"lucy," came the call again, neither her fathers voice nor peters. she  sat up, trembling with excitement but not with fear. the moon was so bright that the whole  forest landscape around her was almost as clear as day, though it looked wilder.  behind her was the fir wood; away to her right the jagged cliff-tops on the far side of  the gorge; straight ahead, open grass to where a glade of trees began about a bow-shot away.  lucy looked very hard at the trees of that glade.
"why, i do believe theyre moving," she said to herself. "theyre walking  about.”
she got up, her heart beating wildly, and walked towards them. there was  certainly a noise in the glade, a noise such as trees make in a high wind, though there  was no wind tonight. yet it was not exactly an ordinary treenoise either. lucy felt  there was a tune in  
it, but she could not catch the tune any more than she had been able to  catch the words when the trees had so nearly talked to her the night before. but there was,  at least, a lilt; she felt her own feet wanting to dance as she got nearer. and now there was  no doubt that the trees were really moving moving in and out through one another as if in  a complicated country dance. ("and i suppose," thought lucy, "when trees  dance, it must be a very, very country dance indeed.) she was almost among them now.
the first tree she looked at seemed at first glance to be not a tree at all  but a huge man with a shaggy beard and great bushes of hair. she was not frightened: she  had seen such things before. but when she looked again he was only a tree, though he was  still moving.
you couldnt see whether he had feet or roots, of course, because when  trees move they dont walk on the surface of the earth; they wade in it as we do in water.  the same thing happened with every tree she looked at. at one moment they seemed to be the  friendly, lovely giant and giantess forms which the tree-people put on when some good  magic has called them into full life: next moment they all looked like trees again.  but when they looked like trees, it was like strangely human trees, and when they looked  like people, it was like strangely branchy and leafy people - and all the time that queer  lilting, rustling, cool, merry noise.
"they are almost awake, not quite," said lucy. she knew she herself was  wide awake, wider than anyone usually is.
she went fearlessly in among them, dancing herself as she leaped this way  and that to avoid being run into by these huge partners. but she was only half  interested in them. she wanted to get beyond them to something else; it was from beyond them that  the dear voice had called.
she soon got through them (half wondering whether she had been using her  arms to push branches aside, or to take hands in a great chain with big dancers who  stooped to reach her) for they were really a ring of trees round a central open place. she  stepped out from among their shifting confusion of lovely lights and shadows.
a circle of grass, smooth as a lawn, met her eyes, with dark trees dancing  all round it.
and then - oh joy! for he was there: the huge lion, shining white in the  moonlight, with his huge black shadow underneath him.
but for the movement of his tail he might have been a stone lion, but lucy  never thought of that. she never stopped to think whether he was a friendly lion or not.  she rushed to him. she felt her heart would burst if she lost a moment. and the next  thing she knew was that she was kissing him and putting her arms as far round his neck as  she could and burying her face in the beautiful rich silkiness of his mane.
"aslan, aslan. dear aslan," sobbed lucy. "at last.”
the great beast rolled over on his side so that lucy fell, half sitting and  half lying between his front paws. he bent forward and just touched her nose with his  tongue. his warm breath came all round her. she gazed up into the large wise face.
"welcome, child," he said.
"aslan," said lucy, "youre bigger.”
"that is because you are older, little one," answered he.
"not because you are?”
"i am not. but every year you grow, you will find me bigger.”
for a time she was so happy that she did not want to speak. but aslan  spoke.
"lucy," he said, "we must not lie here for long. you have work in hand, and  much time has been lost today.”
"yes, wasnt it a shame?" said lucy. "i saw you all right. they wouldnt  believe me.
theyre all so -”
from somewhere deep inside aslans body there came the faintest suggestion  of a growl.
"im sorry," said lucy, who understood some of his moods. "i didnt mean to  start slanging the others. but it wasnt my fault anyway, was it?”
the lion looked straight into her eyes.
"oh, aslan," said lucy. "you dont mean it was? how could i - i couldnt  have left the others and come up to you alone, how could i? dont look at me like that .  . . oh well, i suppose i could. yes, and it wouldnt have been alone, i know, not if i was  with you. but what would have been the good?”
aslan said nothing.
"you mean," said lucy rather faintly, "that it would have turned out all  right - somehow?
but how? please, aslan! am i not to know?”
"to know what would have happened, child?" said aslan. "no. nobody is ever  told that.”
"oh dear," said lucy.
"but anyone can find out what will happen," said aslan. "if you go back to  the others now, and wake them up; and tell them you have seen me again; and that you  must all get up at once and follow me - what will happen? there is only one way of  finding out.”
"do you mean that is what you want me to do?" gasped lucy.
"yes, little one," said aslan.
"will the others see you too?" asked lucy.
"certainly not at first," said aslan. "later on, it depends.”
"but they wont believe me!" said lucy.
"it doesnt matter," said aslan.
"oh dear, oh dear," said lucy. "and i was so pleased at finding you again.  and i thought youd let me stay. and i thought youd come roaring in and frighten all the  enemies away - like last time. and now everything is going to be horrid.”
"it is hard for you, little one," said aslan. "but things never happen the  same way twice.
it has been hard for us all in narnia before now.”
lucy buried her head in his mane to hide from his face. but there must have  been magic in his mane. she could feel lion-strength going into her. quite suddenly  she sat up.
"im sorry, aslan," she said. "im ready now.”
"now you are a lioness," said aslan. "and now all narnia will be renewed.  but come.
we have no time to lose.”
he got up and walked with stately, noiseless paces back to the belt of  dancing trees through which she had just come: and lucy went with him, laying a rather  tremulous hand on his mane. the trees parted to let them through and for one second  assumed their human forms completely. lucy had a glimpse of tall and lovely wood-gods and  wood-goddesses all bowing to the lion; next moment they were trees again, but  still bowing, with such graceful sweeps of branch and trunk that their bowing was itself  a kind of dance.
"now, child," said aslan, when they had left the trees behind them, "i will  wait here. go and wake the others and tell them to follow. if they will not, then you at  least must follow me alone.”
it is a terrible thing to have to wake four people, all older than yourself  and all very tired, for the purpose of telling them something they probably wont believe and  making them do something they certainly wont like. "i mustnt think about it, i must  just do it,”
thought lucy.
she went to peter first and shook him. "peter," she whispered in his ear,  "wake up. quick.
aslan is here. he says weve got to follow him at once.”
"certainly, lu. whatever you like," said peter unexpectedly. this was  encouraging, but as peter instantly rolled round and went to sleep again it wasnt much use.
then she tried susan. susan did really wake up, but only to say in her most  annoying grown-up voice, "youve been dreaming, lucy. go to sleep again.”
she tackled edmund next. it was very difficult to wake him, but when at  last she had done it he was really awake and sat up.
"eh?" he said in a grumpy voice. "what are you talking about?”
she said it all over again. this was one of the worst parts of her job, for  each time she said it, it sounded less convincing.
"aslan!" said edmund, jumping up. "hurray! where?”
lucy turned back to where she could see the lion waiting, his patient eyes  fixed upon her. "there," she said, pointing.
"where?" asked edmund again.
"there. there. dont you see? just this side of the trees.”
edmund stared hard for a while and then said, "no. theres nothing there.  youve got dazzled and muddled with the moonlight. one does, you know. i thought i saw something for a moment myself. its only an optical what-do-you-call-it.”
"i can see him all the time," said lucy. "hes looking straight at us.”
"then why cant i see him?”
"he said you mightnt be able to.”
"why?”
"i dont know. thats what he said.”
"oh, bother it all," said edmund. "i do wish you wouldnt keep on seeing  things. but i suppose well have to wake the others.”

 www.7wenxue.com



CHAPTER ELEVEN

　小./说。txt天堂
the lion roars  when the whole party was finally awake lucy had to tell her story for the  fourth time.
the blank silence which followed it was as discouraging as anything could  be.
"i cant see anything," said peter after he had stared his eyes sore. "can  you, susan?”
"no, of course i cant," snapped susan. "because there isnt anything to  see. shes been dreaming. do lie down and go to sleep, lucy.”
"and i do hope," said lucy in a tremulous voice, "that you will all come  with me.
because - because ill have to go with him whether anyone else does or  not.”
"dont talk nonsense, lucy," said susan. "of course you cant go off on  your own. dont let her, peter. shes being downright naughty.”
"ill go with her, if she must go," said edmund. "shes been right before.”
"i know she has," said peter. "and she may have been right this morning. we  certainly had no luck going down the gorge. still - at this hour of the night. and  why should aslan be invisible to us? he never used to be. its not like him. what does the  d.l.f. say?”
"oh, i say nothing at all," answered the dwarf. "if you all go, of course,  ill go with you; and if your party splits up, ill go with the high king. thats my duty to  him and king caspian. but, if you ask my private opinion, im a plain dwarf who doesnt  think theres much chance of finding a road by night where you couldnt find one by day.  and i have no use for magic lions which are talking lions and dont talk, and friendly  lions though they dont do us any good, and whopping big lions though nobody can see  them. its all bilge and beanstalks as far as i can see.”
"hes beating his paw on the ground for us to hurry," said lucy. "we must  go now. at least i must.”
"youve no right to try to force the rest of us like that. its four to one  and youre the youngest," said susan.
"oh, come on," growled edmund. "weve got to go. therell be no peace till  we do." he fully intended to back lucy up, but he was annoyed at losing his nights  sleep and was making up for it by doing everything as sulkily as possible.
"on the march, then," said peter, wearily fitting his arm into his shield- strap and putting his helmet on. at any other time he would have said something nice to lucy,  who was his favourite sister, for he knew how wretched she must be feeling, and he knew  that,  
whatever had happened, it was not her fault. but he couldnt help being a  little annoyed with her all the same.
susan was the worst. "supposing i started behaving like lucy," she said. "i  might threaten to stay here whether the rest of you went on or not. i jolly well  think i shall.”
"obey the high king, your majesty," said trumpkin, "and lets be off. if  im not to be allowed to sleep, id as soon march as stand here talking.”
and so at last they got on the move. lucy went first, biting her lip and  trying not to say all the things she thought of saying to susan. but she forgot them when she  fixed her eyes on aslan. he turned and walked at a slow pace about thirty yards ahead of  them. the others had only lucys directions to guide them, for aslan was not only  invisible to them but silent as well. his big cat-like paws made no noise on the grass.
he led them to the right of the dancing trees - whether they were still  dancing nobody knew, for lucy had her eyes on the lion and the rest had their eyes on lucy  - and nearer the edge of the gorge. "cobbles and kettledrums!" thought trumpkin. "i hope  this madness isnt going to end in a moonlight climb and broken necks.”
for a long way aslan went along the top of the precipices. then they came  to a place where some little trees grew right on the edge. he turned and disappeared  among them.
lucy held her breath, for it looked as if he had plunged over the cliff;  but she was too busy keeping him in sight to stop and think about this. she quickened her  pace and was soon among the trees herself. looking down, she could see a steep and  narrow path going slantwise down into the gorge between rocks, and aslan descending it. he  turned and looked at her with his happy eyes. lucy clapped her hands and began to  scramble down after him. from behind her she heard the voices of the others shouting,  "hi! lucy! look out, for goodness sake. youre right on the edge of the gorge. come back -  "and then, a moment later, edmunds voice saying, "no, shes right. there is a way  down.”
half-way down the path edmund caught up with her.
"look!" he said in great excitement. "look! whats that shadow crawling  down in front of us?”
"its his shadow," said lucy.
"i do believe youre right, lu," said edmund. "i cant think how i didnt  see it before. but where is he?”
"with his shadow, of course. cant you see him?”
"well, i almost thought i did - for a moment. its such a rum light.”
"get on, king edmund, get on," came trumpkins voice from behind and above:  and then, farther behind and still nearly at the top, peters voice saying,  "oh, buck up, susan.
give me your hand. why, a baby could get down here. and do stop grousing.”
in a few minutes they were at the bottom and the roaring of water filled  their ears.
treading delicately, like a cat, aslan stepped from stone to stone across  the stream. in the middle he stopped, bent down to drink, and as he raised his shaggy head,  dripping from the water, he turned to face them again. this time edmund saw him. "oh,  aslan!" he cried, darting forward. but the lion whisked round and began padding up the  slope on the far side of the rush.
"peter, peter," cried edmund. "did you see?”
"i saw something," said peter. "but its so tricky in this moonlight. on we  go, though, and three cheers for lucy. i dont feel half so tired now, either.”
aslan without hesitation led them to their left, farther up the gorge. the  whole journey was odd and dream-like the roaring stream, the wet grey grass, the  glimmering cliffs which they were approaching, and always the glorious, silently pacing beast  ahead.
everyone except susan and the dwarf could see him now.
presently they came to another steep path, up the face of the farther  precipices. these were far higher than the ones they had just descended, and the journey up  them was a long and tedious zig-zag. fortunately the moon shone right above the gorge  so that neither side was in shadow.
lucy was nearly blown when the tail and hind legs of aslan disappeared over  the top: but with one last effort she scrambled after him and came out, rather shaky- legged and breathless, on the hill they had been trying to reach ever since they left  glasswater. the long gentle slope (heather and grass and a few very big rocks that shone  white in the moonlight) stretched up to where it vanished in a glimmer of trees about  half a mile away. she knew it. it was the hill of the stone table:  with a jingling of mail the others climbed up behind her. aslan glided on  before them and they walked after him.
"lucy," said susan in a very small voice.
"yes?" said lucy.
"i see him now. im sorry.”
"thats all right.”
"but ive been far worse than you know. i really believed it was him - he,  i mean - yesterday. when he warned us not to go down to the fir wood. and i really  believed it  
was him tonight, when you woke us up. i mean, deep down inside. or i could  have, if id let myself. but i just wanted to get out of the woods and - and - oh, i  dont know. and what ever am i to say to him?”
"perhaps you wont need to say much," suggested lucy.
soon they reached the trees and through them the children could see the  great mound, aslans how, which had been raised over the table since their days.
"our side dont keep very good watch," muttered trumpkin. "we ought to have  been challenged before now -”
"hush!" said the other four, for now aslan had stopped and turned and stood  facing them, looking so majestic that they felt as glad as anyone can who feels afraid,  and as afraid as anyone can who feels glad. the boys strode forward: lucy made way for them:  susan and the dwarf shrank back.
"oh, aslan," said king peter, dropping on one knee and raising the lions  heavy paw to his face, "im so glad. and im so sorry. ive been leading them wrong ever  since we started and especially yesterday morning.”
"my dear son," said aslan.
then he turned and welcomed edmund. "well done," were his words.
then, after an awful pause, the deep voice said, "susan." susan made no  answer but the others thought she was crying. "you have listened to fears, child," said  aslan. "come, let me breathe on you. forget them. are you brave again?”
"a little, aslan," said susan.
"and now!" said aslan in a much louder voice with just a hint of roar in  it, while his tail lashed his flanks. "and now, where is this little dwarf, this famous  swordsman and archer, who doesnt believe in lions? come here, son of earth, come here!"  - and the last word was no longer the hint of a roar but almost the real thing.
"wraiths and wreckage!" gasped trumpkin in the ghost of a voice. the  children, who knew aslan well enough to see that he liked the dwarf very much, were not  disturbed; but it was quite another thing for trumpkin, who had never seen a lion  before, let alone this lion. he did the only sensible thing he could have done; that is,  instead of bolting, he tottered towards aslan.
aslan pounced. have you ever seen a very young kitten being carried in the  mother cats mouth? it was like that. the dwarf, hunched up in a little, miserable ball,  hung from aslans mouth. the lion gave him one shake and all his armour rattled like  a tinkers pack and then - heypresto - the dwarf flew up in the air. he was as safe as  if he had been  
in bed, though he did not feel so. as he came down the huge velvety paws  caught him as gently as a mothers arms and set him (right way up, too) on the ground.
"son of earth, shall we be friends?" asked aslan.
"ye - he - he - hes," panted the dwarf, for it had not yet got its breath  back.
"now," said aslan. "the moon is setting. look behind you: there is the dawn  beginning.
we have no time to lose. you three, you sons of adam and son of earth,  hasten into the mound and deal with what you will find there.”
the dwarf was still speechless and neither of the boys dared to ask if  aslan would follow them. all three drew their swords and saluted, then turned and jingled away  into the dusk.
lucy noticed that there was no sign of weariness in their faces: both the  high king and king edmund looked more like men than boys.
the girls watched them out of sight, standing close beside aslan. the light  was changing.
low down in the east, aravir, the morning star of narnia, gleamed like a  little moon.
aslan, who seemed larger than before, lifted his head, shook his mane, and  roared.
the sound, deep and throbbing at first like an organ beginning on a low  note, rose and became louder, and then far louder again, till the earth and air were  shaking with it. it rose up from that hill and floated across all narnia. down in mirazs camp  men woke, stared palely in one anothers faces, and grasped their weapons. down below  that in the great river, now at its coldest hour, the heads and shoulders of the  nymphs, and the great weedy-bearded head of the river-god, rose from the water. beyond it, in  every field and wood, the alert ears of rabbits rose from their holes, the sleepy heads of  birds came out from under wings, owls hooted, vixens barked, hedgehogs grunted, the trees  stirred. in towns and villages mothers pressed babies close to their breasts, staring  with wild eyes, dogs whimpered, and men leaped up groping for lights. far away on the  northern frontier the mountain giants peered from the dark gateways of their castles.
what lucy and susan saw was a dark something coming to them from almost  every direction across the hills. it looked first like a black mist creeping on  the ground, then like the stormy waves of a black sea rising higher and higher as it came on, and  then, at last, like what it was woods on the move. all the trees of the world appeared to  be rushing towards aslan. but as they drew nearer they looked less like trees; and  when the whole crowd, bowing and curtsying and waving thin long arms to aslan, were all  around lucy, she saw that it was a crowd of human shapes. pale birch-girls were tossing  their heads, willowwomen pushed back their hair from their brooding faces to gaze on  aslan, the queenly beeches stood still and adored him, shaggy oak-men, lean and  melancholy elms, shockheaded hollies (dark themselves, but their wives all bright with  berries) and gay rowans, all bowed and rose again, shouting, "aslan, aslan!" in their  various husky or creaking or wave-like voices.
the crowd and the dance round aslan (for it had become a dance once more)  grew so thick and rapid that lucy was confused. she never saw where certain other  people came from who were soon capering about among the trees. one was a youth, dressed  only in a fawn-skin, with vine-leaves wreathed in his curly hair. his face would have  been almost too pretty for a boys, if it had not looked, so extremely wild. you felt,  as edmund said when he saw him a few days later, "theres a chap who might do anything  absolutely anything." he seemed to have a great many names - bromios, bassareus, and  the ram were three of them. there were a lot of girls with him, as wild as he.  there was even, unexpectedly, someone on a donkey. and everybody was laughing: and  everybody was shouting out, "euan, euan, eu-oi-oi-oi.”
"is it a romp, aslan?" cried the youth. and apparently it was. but nearly  everyone seemed to have a different idea as to what they were playing. it may have  been tig, but lucy never discovered who was it. it was rather like blind mans buff, only  everyone behaved as if they were blindfolded. it was not unlike hunt the slipper,  but the slipper was never found. what made it more complicated was that the man on the  donkey, who was old and enormously fat, began calling out at once, "refreshments! time  for refreshments," and falling off his donkey and being bundled on to it again  by the others, while the donkey was under the impression that the whole thing was a circus  and tried to give a display of walking on its hind legs. and all the time there were  more and more vine leaves everywhere. and soon not only leaves but vines. they were  climbing up everything. they were running up the legs of the tree people and circling  round their necks. lucy put up her hands to push back her hair and found she was  pushing back vine branches. the donkey was a mass of them. his tail was completely entangled  and something dark was nodding between his ears. lucy looked again and saw it  was a bunch of grapes. after that it was mostly grapes overhead and underfoot and all  around.
"refreshments! refreshments," roared the old man.
everyone began eating, and whatever hothouses your people may have, you  have never tasted such grapes. really good grapes, firm and tight on the outside, but  bursting into cool sweetness when you put them into your mouth, were one of the things  the girls had never had quite enough of before. here, there were more than anyone could  possibly want, and rib table-manners at all. one saw sticky and stained fingers  everywhere, and, though mouths were full, the laughter never ceased nor the yodelling cries  of euan, euan, eu-oi-oi-oi-oi, till all of a sudden everyone felt at the same moment that  the game (whatever it was), and the feast, ought to be over, and everyone flopped  down breathless on the ground and turned their faces to aslan to hear what he would say  next.
at that moment the sun was just rising and lucy remembered something and  whispered to susan,  "i say, su, i know who they are.”
"who?”
"the boy with the wild face is bacchus and the old one on the donkey is  silenus. dont you remember mr tumnus telling us about them long ago?”
"yes, of course. but i say, lu “
"what?”
"i wouldnt have felt safe with bacchus and all his wild girls if wed met  them without aslan.”
"i should think not," said lucy.

 www．Ｌｚｕｏｗｅｎ．ｃｏｍ



CHAPTER TWELVE

小,说t,xt,天,堂
sorcery and sudden vengeance  meanwhile trumpkin and the two boys arrived at the dark little stone  archway which led into the inside of the mound, and two sentinel badgers (the white  patches on their cheeks were all edmund could see of them) leaped up with bared teeth and  asked them in snarling voices, "who goes there?”
"trumpkin," said the dwarf. "bringing the high king of narnia out of the  far past.”
the badgers nosed at the boys hands. "at last," they said. "at last.”
"give us a light, friends," said trumpkin.
the badgers found a torch just inside the arch and peter lit it and handed  it to trumpkin.
"the d.l.f. had better lead," he said. "we dont know our way about this  place.”
trumpkin took the torch and went ahead into the dark tunnel. it was a cold,  black, musty place, with an occasional bat fluttering in the torchlight, and plenty of  cobwebs. the boys, who had been mostly in the open air since that morning at the railway  station, felt as if they were going into a trap or a prison.
"i say, peter," whispered edmund. "look at those carvings on the walls.  dont they look old? and yet were older than that. when we were last here, they hadnt  been made.”
"yes," said peter. "that makes one think.”
the dwarf went on ahead and then turned to the right, and then to the left,  and then down some steps, and then to the left again. then at last they saw a light ahead  - light from under a door. and now for the first time they heard voices, for they had  come to the door  
of the central chamber. the voices inside were angry ones. someone was  talking so loudly that the approach of the boys and the dwarf had not been heard.
"dont like the sound of that," whispered trumpkin to peter. "lets listen  for a moment.”
all three stood perfectly still on the outside of the door.
"you know well enough," said a voice ("thats the king," whispered  trumpkin), "why the horn was not blown at sunrise this morning. have you forgotten that  miraz fell upon us almost before trumpkin had gone, and we were fighting for our lives for  the space of three hours and more? i blew it when first i had a breathing space.”
"im not likely to forget it," came the angry voice, "when my dwarfs bore  the brunt of the attack and one in five of them fell." ("thats nikabrik," whispered  trumpkin.)
"for shame, dwarf," came a thick voice ("trufflehunters," said trumpkin).  "we all did as much as the dwarfs and none more than the king.”
"tell that tale your own way for all i care," answered nikabrik. "but  whether it was that the horn was blown too late, or whether there was no magic in it, no help  has come. you, you great clerk, you master magician, you know-all; are you still asking us  to hang our hopes on aslan and king peter and all the rest of it?”
"i must confess - i cannot deny it - that i am deeply disappointed in the  result of the operation," came the answer. ("thatll be doctor cornelius," said  trumpkin.)
"to speak plainly," said nikabrik, "your wallets empty, your eggs addled,  your fish uncaught, your promises broken. stand aside then and let others work. and  that is why -”
"the help will come," said trufflehunter. "i stand by aslan. have patience,  like us beasts. the help will come. it may be even now at the door.”
"pah!" snarled nikabrik. "you badgers would have us wait till the sky falls  and we can all catch larks. i tell you we cant wait. food is running short; we lose  more than we can afford at every encounter; our followers are slipping away.”
"and why?" asked trufflehunter. "ill tell you why. because it is noised  among them that we have called on the kings of old and the kings of old have not answered.  the last words trumpkin spoke before he went (and went, most likely, to his death)  were, `if you must blow the horn, do not let the army know why you blow it or what you  hope from it. but that same evening everyone seemed to know.”
"youd better have shoved your grey snout in a hornets nest, badger, than  suggest that i am the blab," said nikabrik. "take it back, or-”
"oh, stop it, both of you," said king caspian. "i want to know what it is  that nikabrik keeps on hinting we should do. but before that, i want to know who those  two strangers  
are whom he has brought into our council and who stand there with their  ears open and their mouths shut.”
"they are friends of mine," said nikabrik. "and what better right have you  yourself to be here than that you are a friend of trumpkins and the badgers? and what  right has that old dotard in the black gown to be here except that he is your friend? why  am i to be the only one who cant bring in his friends?”
"his majesty is the king to whom you have sworn allegiance," said  trufflehunter sternly.
"court manners, court manners," sneered nikabrik. "but in this hole we may  talk plainly.
you know - and he knows that this telmarine boy will be king of nowhere and  nobody in a week unless we can help him out of the trap in which he sits.”
"perhaps," said cornelius, "your new friends would like to speak for  themselves? you there, who and what are you?”
"worshipful master doctor," came a thin, whining voice. "so please you, im  only a poor old woman, i am, and very obliged to his worshipful dwarfship for his  friendship, im sure. his majesty, bless his handsome face, has no need to be afraid of an  old woman thats nearly doubled up with the rheumatics and hasnt two sticks to put  under her kettle.
i have some poor little skill - not like yours, master doctor, of course -  in small spells and cantrips that id be glad to use against our enemies if it was  agreeable to all concerned. for i hate em. oh yes. no one hates better than me.”
"that is all most interesting and - er - satisfactory," said doctor  cornelius. "i think i now know what you are, madam. perhaps your other friend, nikabrik, would give  some account of himself?”
a dull, grey voice at which peters flesh crept replied, "im hunger. im  thirst. where i bite, i hold till i die, and even after death they must cut out my mouthful  from my enemys body and bury it with me. i can fast a hundred years and not die. i  can lie a hundred nights on the ice and not freeze. i can drink a river of blood and  not burst. show me your enemies.”
"and it is in the presence of these two that you wish to disclose your  plan?" said caspian.
"yes," said nikabrik. "and by their help that i mean to execute it.”
there was a minute or two during which trumpkin and the boys could hear  caspian and his two friends speaking in low voices but could not make out what they  were saying.
then caspian spoke aloud.
"well, nikabrik," he said, "we will hear your plan.”
there was a pause so long that the boys began to wonder if nikabrik was  ever going to begin; when he did, it was in a lower voice, as if he himself did not much  like what he was saying.
"all said and done," he muttered, "none of us knows the truth about the  ancient days in narnia. trumpkin believed none of the stories. i was ready to put them to  the trial. we tried first the horn and it has failed. if there ever was a high king peter  and a queen susan and a king edmund and a queen lucy, then either they have not heard  us, or they cannot come, or they are our enemies -”
"or they are on the way," put in trufflehunter.
"you can go on saying that till miraz has fed us all to his dogs. as i was  saying, we have tried one link in the chain of old legends, and it has done us no good.  well. but when your sword breaks, you draw your dagger. the stories tell of other powers  beside the ancient kings and queens. how if we could call them up?”
"if you mean aslan," said trufflehunter, "its all one calling on him and  on the kings.
they were his servants. if he will not send them (but i make no doubt he  will), is he more likely to come himself?”
"no. youre right there," said nikabrik. "aslan and the kings go together.  either aslan is dead, or he is not on our side. or else something stronger than himself  keeps him back.
and if he did come - how do we know hed be our friend? he was not always a  good friend to dwarfs by all thats told. not even to all beasts. ask the  wolves. and anyway, he was in narnia only once that i ever heard of, and he didnt stay long.  you may drop aslan out of the reckoning. i was thinking of someone else.”
there was no answer, and for a few minutes it was so still that edmund  could hear the wheezy and snuffling breath of the badger.
"who do you mean?" said caspian at last.
"i mean a power so much greater than aslans that it held narnia spellbound  for years and years, if the stories are true.”
"the white witch!" cried three voices all at once, and from the noise peter  guessed that three people had leaped to their feet.
"yes," said nikabrik very slowly and distinctly, "i mean the witch. sit  down again. dont all take fright at a name as if you were children. we want power: and we  want a power that will be on our side. as for power, do not the stories say that the  witch defeated aslan, and bound him, and killed him on that very stone which is over  there, just beyond the light?”
"but they also say that he came to life again," said the badger sharply.
"yes, they say," answered nikabrik, "but youll notice that we hear  precious little about anything he did afterwards. he just fades out of the story. how do you  explain that, if he really came to life? isnt it much more likely that he didnt, and that the  stories say nothing more about him because there was nothing more to say?”
"he established the kings and queens," said caspian.
"a king who has just won a great battle can usually establish himself  without the help of a performing lion," said nikabrik. there was a fierce growl, probably from  trufflehunter.
"and anyway," nikabrik continued, "what came of the kings and their reign?  they faded too. but its very different with the witch. they say she ruled for a  hundred years: a hundred years of winter. theres power, if you like. theres something  practical.”
"but, heaven and earth!" said the king, "havent we always been told that  she was the worst enemy of all? wasnt she a tyrant ten times worse than miraz?”
"perhaps," said nikabrik in a cold voice. "perhaps she was for you humans,  if there were any of you in those days. perhaps she was for some of the beasts. she  stamped out the beavers, i dare say; at least there are none of them in narnia now. but she  got on all right with us dwarfs. im a dwarf and i stand by my own people. were not afraid  of the witch.”
"but youve joined with us," said trufflehunter.
"yes, and a lot of good it has done my people, so far," snapped nikabrik.  "who is sent on all the dangerous !, raids? the dwarfs. who goes short when the rations  fail? the dwarfs. who -?”
"lies! all lies!" said the badger.
"and so," said nikabrik, whose voice now rose to a scream, "if you cant  help my people, ill go to someone who can.”
"is this open treason, dwarf?" asked the king.
"put that sword back in its sheath, caspian," said nikabrik. "murder at  council, eh? is that your game? dont be fool enough to try it. do you think im afraid of  you? theres three on my side, and three on yours.”
"come on, then," snarled trufflehunter, but he was immediately interrupted.
"stop, stop, stop," said doctor cornelius. "you go on too fast. the witch  is dead. all the stories agree on that. what does nikabrik mean by calling on the witch?”
that grey and terrible voice which had spoken only once before said, "oh,  is she?”
and then the shrill, whining voice began, "oh, bless his heart, his dear  little majesty neednt mind about the white lady - thats what we call her - being dead.  the worshipful master doctor is only making game of a poor old woman like me when he says  that.
sweet mastery doctor, learned master doctor, who ever heard of a witch that  really died? you can always get them back.”
"call her up," said the grey voice. "we are all ready. draw the circle.  prepare the blue fire.”
above the steadily increasing growl of the badger and corneliuss sharp  "what?" rose the voice of king caspian like thunder.
"so that is your plan, nikabrik! black sorcery and the calling up of an  accursed ghost.
and i see who your companions are-a hag and a werewolf!”
the next minute or so was very confused. there was an animal roaring, a  clash of steel; the boys and trumpkin rushed in; peter had a glimpse of a horrible, grey,  gaunt creature, half man and half wolf, in the very act of leaping upon a boy about his own  age, and edmund saw a badger and a dwarf rolling on the floor in a sort of cat  fight. trumpkin found himself face to face with the hag. her nose and chin stuck out like a  pair of nut-crackers, her dirty grey hair was flying about her face and she had just  got doctor cornelius by the throat. at one slash of trumpkins sword her head rolled  on the floor.
then the light was knocked over and it was all swords, teeth, claws, fists,  and boots for about sixty seconds. then silence.
"are you all right, ed?”
"i - i think so," panted edmund. "ive got that brute nikabrik, but hes  still alive.”
"weights and water-bottles!" came an angry voice. "its me youre sitting  on. get off.
youre like a young elephant.”
"sorry, d.l.f.," said edmund. "is that better?”
"ow! no!" bellowed trumpkin. "youre putting your  boot in my mouth. go  away."  `  "is king caspian anywhere?" asked peter.
"im here," said a rather faint voice. "something bit me.”
they all heard the noise of someone striking a match. it was edmund. the  little flame showed his face, looking pale and dirty. he blundered about for a little,  found the candle (they were no longer using the lamp, for they had run out of oil), set it  on the table, and lit  
it. when the flame rose clear, several people scrambled to their feet. six  faces blinked at one another in the candlelight.
"we dont seem to have any enemies left," said peter. "theres the hag,  dead." (he turned his eyes quickly away from her.) "and nikabrik, dead too. and i suppose  this thing is a werewolf. its so long since ive seen one. wolfs head and mans body.  that means he was just turning from man into wolf at the moment he was killed. and you, i  suppose, are king caspian?”
"yes," said the other boy. "but ive no idea who you are.”
"its the high king, king peter," said trumpkin.
"your majesty is very welcome," said caspian.
"and so is your majesty," said peter. "i havent come to take your place,  you know, but to put you into it." ,  "your majesty," said another voice at peters elbow. he turned and found  himself face to face with the badger.
peter leaned forward, put his arms round the beast and kissed the furry  head: it wasnt a girlish thing for him to do, because he was the high king.
"best of badgers," he said. "you never doubted us all through.”
"no credit to me, your majesty," said trufflehunter. "1m a beast and we  dont change.
im a badger, whats more, and we hold on.”
"i am sorry for nikabrik," said caspian, "though he hated me from the first  moment he saw me. he had gone sour inside from long suffering and hating. if we had  won quickly he might have become a good dwarf in the days of peace. i dont know which  of us killed him. im glad of that.”
"youre bleeding," said peter.
"yes, im bitten," said caspian. "it was that - that wolf thing." cleaning  and bandaging the wound took a long time, and when it was done trumpkin said, "now.  before everything else we want some breakfast.”
"but not here," said peter.
"no," said caspian with a shudder. "and we must send someone to take away  the bodies.”
"let the vermin be flung into a pit," said peter. "but the dwarf we will  give to his people to be buried in their own fashion.”
they breakfasted at last in another of the dark cellars of aslans how. it  was not such a breakfast as they would have chosen, for caspian and cornelius were  thinking of venison pasties, and peter and edmund of buttered eggs and hot coffee, but what  everyone got was a little bit of cold bear-meat (out of the boys pockets), a lump of  hard cheese, an onion, and a mug of water. but, from the way they fell to, anyone would  have supposed it was delicious.





CHAPTER THIRTEEN

｛小｝｛说｝｛t｝｛xt｝｛天｝｛堂
the high king in command  "now," said peter, as they finished their meal, "aslan and the girls  (thats queen susan and queen lucy, caspian) are somewhere close. we dont know when he will  act. in his time, no doubt, not ours. in the meantime he would like us to do what we  can on our own.
you say, caspian, we are not strong enough to meet miraz in pitched  battle?”
"im afraid not, high king," said caspian. he was liking peter very much,  but was rather tongue-tied. it was much stranger for him to meet the great kings out of  the old stories than it was for them to meet him.
"very well, then," said peter, "ill send him a challenge to single  combat." no one had thought of this before.
"please," said caspian, "could it not be me? i want to avenge my father.”
"youre wounded," said peter. "and anyway, wouldnt he just laugh at a  challenge from you? i mean, we have seen that you are a king and a warrior but he thinks  of you as a kid.”
"but, sire," said the badger, who sat very close to peter and never took  his eyes off him.
"will he accept a . challenge even from you? he knows he has the stronger .  army.”
"very likely he wont," said peter, "but theres always the chance. and  even if he doesnt, we shall spend the best part of the day sending heralds to and fro and all  that. by then aslan may have done something. and at least i can inspect the army and  strengthen the position. i will send the challenge. in fact i will write it at once. have  you pen and ink, master doctor?”
"a scholar is never without them, your majesty," answered doctor cornelius.
"very well, i will dictate," said peter. and while the doctor spread out a  parchment and opened his ink-horn and sharpened his pen, peter leant back with half- closed eyes and recalled to his mind the language in which he had written such things long  ago in narnias golden age.
"right," he said at last. "and now, if you are ready, doctor?”
doctor cornelius dipped his pen and waited. peter dictated as follows:  "peter, by the gift of aslan, by election, by prescription, and by  conquest, high king over all kings in narnia, emperor of the lone islands and lord of cair paravel,  knight of the most noble order of the lion, to miraz, son of caspian the eighth, sometime  lord protector of narnia and now styling himself king of narnia, greeting. have  you got that?”
"narnia, comma, greeting," muttered the doctor. "yes, sire.”
"then begin a new paragraph," said peter. "for to prevent the effusion of  blood, and for the avoiding all other inconveniences likely to grow from the wars now  levied in our realm of narnia, it is our pleasure to adventure our royal person on behalf  of our trusty and well-beloved caspian in clean wager of battle to prove upon your  lordships body that the said caspian is lawful king under us in narnia both by our gift  and by the laws of the telmarines, and your lordship twice guilty of treachery both in  withholding the dominion of narnia from the said caspian and in the most abhominable, -  dont forget to spell it with an h, doctor - bloody, and unnatural murder of your kindly  lord and brother king caspian ninth of that name. wherefore we most heartily provoke,  challenge, and defy your lordship to the said combat and monomachy, and have sent these  letters by the hand of our well beloved and royal brother edmund, sometime king under us  in narnia, duke of lantern waste and count of the western march, knight of the noble  order of the table, to whom we have given full power of determining with your  lordship all the conditions of the said battle. given at our lodging in aslans how this xii  day of the month greenroof in the first year of caspian tenth of narnia.
"that ought to do," said peter, drawing a deep breath.
"and now we must send two others with king edmund. i think the giant ought  to be one.”
"hes - hes not very clever, you know," said caspian.
"of course not," said peter. "but any giant looks impressive if only he  will keep quiet.
and it will cheer him up. but who for the other?”
"upon my word," said trumpkin, "if you want someone who can kill with  looks, reepicheep would be the best.”
"he would indeed, from all i hear," said peter with a laugh. "if only he  wasnt so small.
they wouldnt even see him till he was close!”
"send glenstorm, sire," said trufflehunter. "no one ever laughed at a  centaur.”
an hour later two great lords in the army of miraz, the lord glozelle and  the lord sopespian, strolling along their lines and picking their teeth after  breakfast, looked up and saw coming down to them from the wood the centaur and giant  wimbleweather, whom they had seen before in battle, and between them a figure they could  not recognize.
nor indeed would the other boys at edmunds school have recognized him if  they could have seen him at that moment. for aslan had breathed on him at their  meeting and a kind of greatness hung about him.
"whats to do?" said the lord glozelle. "an attack?”
"a parley, rather," said sopespian. "see, they carry green branches. they  are coming to surrender most likely.”
"he that is walking between the centaur and the giant has no look of  surrender in his face," said glozelle. "who can he be? it is not the boy caspian.”
"no indeed," said sopespian. "this is a fell warrior, i warrant you,  wherever the rebels have got him from. he is (in your lordships private ear) a kinglier man  than ever miraz was. and what mail he wears! none of our smiths can make the like.”
"ill wager my dappled pomely he brings a challenge, not a surrender," said  glozelle.
"how then?" said sopespian. "we hold the enemy in our fist here. miraz  would never be so hair-brained as to throw away his advantage on a combat.”
"he might be brought to it," said glozelle in a much lower voice.
"softly," said sopespian. "step a little aside here out of earshot of those  sentries. now.
have i taken your lordships meaning aright?”
"if the king undertook wager of battle," whispered glozelle, "why, either  he would kill or be killed.”
"so," said sopespian, nodding his head.
"and if he killed we should have won this war.”
"certainly. and if not?”
"why, if not, we should be as able to win it without the kings grace as  with him. for i need not tell your lordship that miraz is no very great captain. and after  that, we should be both victorious and kingless.”
"and it is your meaning, my lord, that you and i could hold this land quite  as conveniently without a king as with one?”
glozelles face grew ugly. "not forgetting," said he, "that it was we who  first put him on the throne. and in all the years that he has enjoyed it, what fruits have  come our way?
what gratitude has he shown us?”
"say no more," answered sopespian. "but look - herd comes one to fetch us  to the kings tent."  `  when they reached mirazs tent they saw edmund and his two companions  seated outside it and being entertained with cakes and wine, having already delivered the  challenge, and withdrawn while the king was considering it. when they saw them thus at  close quarters the two telmarine lords thought all three of them very alarming.
inside, they found miraz, unarmed and finishing his breakfast. his face was  flushed and there was a scowl on his brow.
"there!" he growled, flinging the parchment across the table to them. "see  what a pack of nursery tales our jackanapes of a nephew has sent us.”
"by your leave, sire," said glozelle. "if the young warrior whom we have  just seen outside is the king edmund mentioned in the writing, then i would not call  him a nursery tale but a very dangerous knight.”
"king edmund, pah!" said miraz. "does your lordship believe those old  wives fables about peter and edmund and the rest?”
"i believe my eyes, your majesty," said glozelle.
"well, this is to no purpose," said miraz, "but as touching the challenge,  i suppose there is only one opinion between us?”
"i suppose so, indeed, sire," said glozelle.
"and what is that?" asked the king.
"most infallibly to refuse it," said glozelle. "for though i have never  been called a coward, i must plainly say that to meet that young man in battle is more  than my heart would serve me for. and if (as is likely) his brother, the high king, is  more dangerous than he why, on your life, my lord king, have nothing to do with him.”
"plague on you!" cried miraz. "it was not that sort of council i wanted. do  you think i am asking you if i should be afraid to meet this peter (if there is such a  man)? do you think i fear him? i wanted your counsel on the policy of the matter; whether we,  having the advantage, should hazard it on a wager of battle.”
"to which i can only answer, your majesty," said glozelle, "that for all  reasons the challenge should be refused. there is death in the strange knights face.”
"there you are again!" said miraz, now thoroughly angry. "are you trying,  to make it appear that i am as great a coward as your lordship?”
"your majesty may say your pleasure," said glozelle sulkily.
"you talk like an old woman, glozelle," said the king. "what say you, my  lord sopespian?”
"do not touch it, sire," was the reply. "and what your majesty says of the  policy of the thing comes in very happily. it gives your majesty excellent grounds for a  refusal without any cause for questioning your majestys honour or courage.”
"great heaven!" exclaimed miraz, jumping to his feet. "are you also  bewitched today?
do you think i am looking for grounds to refuse it? you might as well call  me coward to my face.”
the conversation was going exactly as the two lords wished, so they said  nothing.
"i see what it is," said miraz, after staring at them as if his eyes would  start out of his head, "you are as lilylivered as hares yourselves and have the effrontery  to imagine my heart after the likeness of yours! grounds for a refusal, indeed! excuses  for not fighting!
are you soldiers? are you telmarines? are you men? and if i dog refuse it  (as ail good reasons of captaincy and martial policy urge me to do) you will think, and  teach others tan think, i was afraid. is it not so?”
"no man of your majestys age," said glozelle, "would be called coward by  any wise soldier for refusing the combat with a great warrior in the flower of his  youth.”
"so im to be a dotard with one foot in the grave, as well as a dastard,"  roared miraz. "ill tell you what it is, my lords. with your womanish counsels (ever shying  from the true point, which is one of policy) you have done the very opposite of your  intent. i had meant to refuse it. but ill accept it. do you hear, accept it! ill not be  shamed because some witchcraft or treason has frozen both your bloods.”
"we beseech your majesty -" said glozelle, but miraz had flung out of the  tent and they could hear him bawling out his acceptance to edmund.
the two lords looked at one another and chuckled quietly.
"i knew hed do it if he were properly chafed," said glozelle. "but ill  not forget he called me coward. it shall be paid for.”
there was a great stirring at aslans how when the news came back and was communicated to the various creatures. edmund, with one of mirazs  captains, had already marked out the place for the combat, and ropes and stakes had been  put round it.
two telmarines were to stand at two of the corners, and one in the middle  of one side, as marshals of the lists. three marshals for the other two corners and the  other side were to be furnished by the high king. peter was just explaining to caspian that he  could not be one, because his right to the throne was what they were fighting about,  when suddenly a thick, sleepy voice said, "your majesty, please." peter turned and there  stood the eldest of the bulgy bears.
"if you please, your majesty," he said, "im a bear, i am.”
"to be sure, so you are, and a good bear too, i dont doubt," said peter.
"yes," said the bear. "but it was always a right of the, bears to supply  one marshal of the lists.”
"dont let him," whispered trumpkin to peter. "hes a good creature, but  hell shame us all. hell go to sleep and he will suck his paws. in front of the enemy  too.”
"i cant help that," said peter. "because hes quite right. the bears had  that privilege. i cant imagine how it has been remembered all these years, when so many  other things have been forgotten.”
"please, your majesty," said the bear.
"it is your right," said peter. "and you shall be one of the marshals. but  you must remember not to suck your paws.”
"of course not," said the bear in a very shocked voice.
"why, youre doing it this minute!" bellowed trumpkin.
the bear whipped his paw out of his mouth and pretended he hadnt heard.
"sire!" came a shrill voice from near the ground.
"ah - reepicheep!" said peter after looking up and down and round as people  usually did when addressed by the mouse.
"sire," said reepicheep. "my life is ever at your command, but my honour is  my own.
sire, i have among my people the only trumpeter in your majestys army. i  had thought,  
perhaps, we might have been sent with the challenge. sire, my people are  grieved.
perhaps if it were your pleasure that i should be a marshal of the lists,  it would content them.”
a noise not unlike thunder broke out from somewhere overhead at this point,  as giant wimbleweather burst into one of those not very intelligent laughs to which  the nicer sorts of giant are so liable. he checked himself at once and looked as grave as a  turnip by the time reepicheep discovered where the noise came from.
"i am afraid it would not do," said peter very gravely. "some humans are  afraid of mice -“
"i had observed it, sire," said reepicheep.
"and it would not be quite fair to miraz," peter continued, "to have in  sight anything that might abate the edge of his courage.”
"your majesty is the mirror of honour," said the mouse with one of his  admirable bows.
"and on this matter we have but a single mind... i thought i heard someone  laughing just now. if anyone present wishes to make me the subject of his wit, i am very  much at his service - with my sword - whenever he has leisure.”
an awful silence followed this remark, which was broken by peter saying,  "giant wimbleweather and the bear and the centaur glenstorm shall be our marshals.  the combat will be at two hours after noon. dinner at noon precisely.”
"i say," said edmund as they walked away, "i suppose it is all right. i  mean, i suppose you can beat him?”
"thats what im fighting him to find out," said peter.

www.xiabook.com



CHAPTER FOURTEEN

www.xiaboＯk.com
how all were very busy  a little before two oclock trumpkin and the badger sat with the rest of  the creatures at the woods edge looking across at the gleaming line of mirazs army  which was about two arrow-shots away. in between, a square space of level grass had been  staked for the combat. at the two far corners stood glozelle and sopespian with drawn  swords. at the near corners were giant wimbleweather and the bulgy bear, who in spite of  all their warnings was sucking his paws and looking, to tell the truth, uncommonly  silly. to make up for this, glenstorm on the right of the lists, stock-still except when  he stamped a hind hoof occasionally on the turf, looked much more imposing than the telmarine  baron who  
faced him on the left. peter had just shaken hands with edmund and the  doctor, and was now walking down to the combat. it was like the moment before the pistol  goes at an important race, but very much worse.
"i wish aslan had turned up before it came to this," said trumpkin.
"so do i," said trufflehunter. "but look behind you.”
"crows and crockery!" muttered the dwarf as soon as he had done so. "what  are they?
huge people - beautiful people - like gods and goddesses and giants.  hundreds and thousands of them, closing in behind us. what are they?”
"its the dryads and hamadryads and silvans," said trufflehunter. "aslan  has waked them.”
"humph!" said the dwarf. "thatll be very useful if the enemy try any  treachery. but it wont help the high king very much if miraz proves handier with his sword.”
the badger said nothing, for now peter and miraz were entering the lists  from opposite ends, both on foot, both in chain shirts, with helmets and shields. they  advanced till they were close together. both bowed and seemed to speak,, but it was impossible  to hear what they said. next moment, the two swords flashed in the sunlight. for a  second the clash could be heard but it was immediately drowned because both armies  began shouting like crowds at a football match.
"well done, peter, oh, well done!" shouted edmund as he saw miraz reel back  a whole pace and a half. "follow it up, quick!" and peter did, and for a few  seconds it looked as if the fight might be won. but then miraz pulled himself together - began  to make real use of his height and weight "miraz! miraz! the king! the king!" came the  roar of the telmarines. caspian and edmund grew white with sickening anxiety.
"peter is taking some dreadful knocks," said edmund.
"hullo!" said caspian. "whats happening now?”
"both falling apart," said edmund. "a bit blown, expect. watch. ah, now  theyre beginning again, more scientifically this time. circling round and round,  feeling each others defences.”
"im afraid this miraz knows his work," muttered the doctor. but hardly had  he said this when there was such a clapping and baying and throwing up of hoods among  the old narnians that it was nearly deafening.
"what was it? what was it?" asked the doctor. "my old eyes missed it.”
"the high king has pricked him in the arm-pit," said caspian, still  clapping. "just where the arm-hole of the hauberk let the point through. first blood.  "its looking ugly again now, though," said edmund. "peters not using his  shield properly. he must be hurt in the left arm.”
it was only too true. everyone could see that peters shield hung limp. the  shouting of the telmarines redoubled.
"youve seen more battles than i," said caspian. "is there any chance now?”
"precious little," said edmund. "i suppose he might just do it. with luck.”
"oh, why did we let it happen at all?" said caspian.
suddenly all the shouting on both sides died down. edmund was puzzled for a  moment.
then he said, "oh, i see. theyve both agreed to a rest. come on, doctor.  you and i may be able to do something for the high king. they ran down to the lists and  peter came outside the ropes to meet them, his face red and sweaty, his chest heaving.
"is your left arm wounded?" asked edmund.
"its not exactly a wound," peter said. "i got the weight of his shoulder  on my shield - like a load of bricks and the rim of the shield drove into my wrist. i dont  think its broken, but it might be a sprain. if you could tie it up very tight i think i could  manage.”
while they were doing this, edmund asked anxiously. "what do you think of  him, peter?”
"tough," said peter. "very tough. i have a chance if can keep him on the  hop till his weight and short wind come against him - in this hot sun too. to tell the  truth, i havent much chance else. give my love to - to everyone at home, ed, if he gets me.  here he comes into the lists again  so long, old chap. good-bye, doctor. and i say, ed, say something specially  nice to trumpkin. hes been a brick.”
edmund couldnt speak. he walked back with the doctor to his own lines with  a sick feeling in his stomach.
but the new bout went well. peter now seemed to be able to make some use of  his shield, and he certainly made good use of his feet. he was almost playing tig with  miraz now, keeping out of range, shifting his ground, making the enemy work.
"coward!" booed the telmarines. "why dont you stand up to him? dont you  like it, eh?
thought youd come to fight, not dance. yah!”
"oh, i do hope he wont listen to them," said caspian.
"not he," said edmund. "you dont know him - oh!" for miraz had got in a  blow at last, on peters helmet. peter staggered, slipped sideways, and fell on one knee.  the roar of the telmarines rose like the noise of the sea. "now, miraz," they yelled. "now.  quick!
quick! kill him." but indeed there was no need to egg the usurper on. he  was on top of peter already. edmund bit his lips till the blood came, as the sword  flashed down on peter. it looked as if it would slash off his head. thank heavens! it had  glanced down his right shoulder. the dwarf-wrought mail was sound and did not break.
"great scott!" cried edmund. "hes up again. peter, go it, peter.”
"i couldnt see what happened," said the doctor. "how did he do it?”
"grabbed mirazs arm as it came down," said trumpkin, dancing with delight.  "theres a man for you! uses his enemys arm as a ladder. the high king! the high  king! up, old narnia!”
"look," said trufflehunter. "miraz is angry. it is good." they were  certainly at it hammer and tongs now: such a flurry of blows that it seemed impossible for either  not to be killed.
as the excitement grew, the shouting almost died away. the spectators were  holding their breath. it was most horrible and most magnificent.
a great shout arose from the old narnians. miraz was a down - not struck by  peter, but face downwards, having tripped on a tussock. peter stepped back, waiting  for him to rise.
"oh bother, bother, bother," said edmund to himself. "need he be as  gentlemanly as all that? i suppose he must. comes of being a knight and a high king. i suppose  it is what aslan would like. but that brute will be up again in a minute and then -”
but "that brute" never rose. the lords glozelle and sopespian had their own  plans ready.
as soon as they saw their king down they leaped into the lists crying,  "treachery!
treachery! the narnian traitor has stabbed him in the back while he lay  helpless. to arms! to arms, telmar!”
peter hardly understood what was happening. he saw two big men running  towards him with drawn swords. then the third telmarine had leaped over the ropes on  his; left. "to arms, narnia! treachery!" peter shouted. if all three had set upon him at  once he would never have spoken again. but glozelle stopped to stab his own king dead  where he lay: "thats for your insult, this morning," he whispered as the blade went  home.  peter swung to face sopespian, slashed his legs from under him and, with the back-cut  of the same stroke, walloped off his head edmund was now at his side crying, "narnia,  narnia! the lion!" the whole telmarine army was rushing toward them. but now the giant  was stamping forward, stooping low and swinging his club. the centaurs charged.  twang,  
twang behind and hiss, hiss overhead came the archery of dwarfs. trumpkin  was fighting at his left. full battle was joined.
"come back, reepicheep, you little ass!" shouted peter. "youll only be  killed. this is no place for mice." but the ridiculous little creatures were dancing in and  out among the feet of both armies, jabbing with their swords. many a telmarine warrior that  day felt his foot suddenly pierced as if by a dozen skewers, hopped on one leg cursing the  pain, and fell as often as not. if he fell, the mice finished him off; if he did not, someone  else did.
but almost before the old narnians were really warmed to their work they  found the enemy giving way. toughlooking warriors turned white, gazed in terror not  on the old narnians but on something behind them, and then flung down their weapons,  shrieking, "the wood! the wood! the end of the world!”
but soon neither their cries nor the sound of weapons could be heard any  more, for both were drowned in the ocean-like roar of the awakened trees as they plunged  through the ranks of peters army, and then on, in pursuit of the telmarines. have you  ever stood at the edge of a great wood on a high ridge when a wild south-wester broke  over it in full fury on an autumn evening? imagine that sound. and then imagine that the  wood, instead of being fixed to one place, was rushing at you; and was no longer trees  but huge people; yet still like trees because their long arms waved like branches and their  heads tossed and leaves fell round them in showers. it was like that for the telmarines. it  was a little alarming even for the narnians. in a few minutes all mirazs followers were  running down to the great river in the hope of crossing the bridge to the town of  beruna and there defending themselves behind ramparts and closed gates.
they reached the river, but there was no bridge. it had disappeared since  yesterday. then utter panic and horror fell upon them and they all surrendered.
but what had happened to the bridge?
early that morning, after a few hours sleep, the girls had waked, to see  aslan standing over them and to hear his voice saying, "we will make holiday." they rubbed  their eyes and looked round them. the trees had all gone but could still be seen  moving away towards aslans how in a dark mass. bacchus and the maenads - his fierce,  madcap girls - and silenus were still with them. lucy, fully rested, jumped up. everyone  was awake, everyone was laughing, flutes were playing, cymbals clashing. animals, not  talking animals, were crowding in upon them from every direction.
"what is it, aslan?" said lucy, her eyes dancing and her feet wanting to  dance.
"come, children," said he. "ride on my back again today.”
"oh, lovely!" cried lucy, and both girls climbed on to the warm golden back  as they had done no one knew how many years before. then the whole party moved off  aslan  
leading, bacchus and his maenads leaping, rushing, and turning somersaults,  the beasts frisking round them, and silenus and his donkey bringing up the rear.
they turned a little to the right, raced down a steep hill, and found the  long bridge of beruna in front of them. before they had begun to cross it, however, up out  of the water came a great wet, bearded head, larger than a mans, crowned with rushes.  it looked at aslan and out of its mouth a deep voice came.
"hail, lord," it said. "loose my chains.”
"who on earth is that?" whispered susan.
"i think its the river-god, but hush," said lucy.
"bacchus," said aslan. "deliver him from his chains.”
"that means the bridge, i expect," thought lucy. and so it did. bacchus and  his people splashed forward into the shallow water, and a minute later the most  curious things began happening. great, strong trunks of ivy came curling up all the piers of the  bridge, growing as quickly as a fire grows, wrapping the stones round, splitting,  breaking, separating them. the walls of the bridge turned into hedges gay with  hawthorn for a moment and then disappeared as the whole thing with a rush and a rumble  collapsed into the swirling water. with much splashing, screaming, and laughter the  revellers waded or swam or danced across the ford ("hurrah! its the ford of beruna again  now!" cried the girls) and up the bank on the far side and into the town.
everyone in the streets fled before their faces. the first house they came  to was a school: a girls school, where lot of narnian girls, with their hair done very  tight and ugly tight collars round their necks and thick tickly stockings on their legs, were  having a history lesson. the sort of "history" that was taught in narnia under mirazs rule  was duller than the truest history you ever read and less true than the most exciting  adventure story.
"if you dont attend, gwendolen," said the mistress, and stop looking out  of the window, i shall have to give you an order-mark.”
"but please, miss prizzle -" began gwendolen.
"did you hear what i said, gwendolen?" asked miss prizzle.
"but please, miss prizzle," said gwendolen, "theres a lion!”
"take two order-marks for talking nonsense," said miss prizzle. "and now -"  a roar interrupted her. ivy came curling in at the windows of the classroom. the  walls became a mass of shimmering green, and leafy branches arched overhead where the  ceiling had been. miss prizzle found she was standing on grass in a forest glade. she  clutched at her desk to steady herself, and found that the desk was a rose-bush. wild  people such as she  
had never even imagined were crowding round her. then she saw the lion,  screamed and fled, and with her fled her class, who were mostly dumpy, prim little girls  with fat legs.
gwendolen hesitated.
"youll stay with us, sweetheart?" said aslan.
"oh, may i? thank you, thank you," said gwendolen. instantly she joined  hands with two of the maenads, who whirled her round in a merry dance and helped her take  off some of the unnecessary and uncomfortable clothes that she was wearing.
wherever they went in the little town of beruna it was the same. most of  the people fled, a few joined them. when they left the town they were a larger and a merrier  company.
they swept on across the level fields on the north bank, or left bank, of  the river. at every farm animals came out to join them. sad old donkeys who had never  known joy grew suddenly young again; chained dogs broke their chains; horses kicked  their carts to pieces and came trotting along with them - clop-clop - kicking up the mud  and whinnying.
at a well in a yard they met a man who was beating a boy. the stick burst  into flower in the mans hand. he tried to drop it, but it stuck to his hand. his arm  became a branch, his body the trunk of a tree, his feet took root. the boy, who had been crying  a moment before, burst out laughing and joined them.
at a little town half-way to beaversdam, where two rivers met, they came to  another school, where a tiredlooking girl was teaching arithmetic to a number of  boys who looked very like pigs. she looked out of the window and saw the divine revellers  singing up the street and a stab of joy went through her heart. aslan stopped right under  the window and looked up at her.
"oh, dont, dont," she said. "id love to. but i mustnt. i must stick to  my work. and the children would be frightened if they saw you.”
"frightened?" said the most pig-like of the boys. "whos she talking to out  of the window? lets tell the inspector she talks to people out of the window when  she ought to be teaching us.”
"lets go and see who it is," said another boy, and they all came crowding  to the window.
but as soon as their mean little faces looked out, bacchus gave a great cry  of euan, euoi-oi-oi-of and the boys all began howling with fright and trampling one  another down to get out of the door and jumping out of the windows. and it was said  afterwards (whether truly or not) that those particular little boys were never seen again, but  that there were a lot of very fine little pigs in that part of the country which had never  been there before.
"now, dear heart," said aslan to the mistress, and she jumped down and  joined them.
at beaversdam they re-crossed the river and came east again along the  southern bank.
they came to a little cottage where a child stood in the doorway crying.  "why are you crying, my love?" asked aslan. the child, who had never seen a picture of a  lion, was not afraid of him. "aunties very ill," she said. "shes going to die." then  aslan went to go in at the door of the cottage, but it was too small for him. so, when he had  got his head through, he pushed with his shoulders (lucy and susan fell off when he did  this) and lifted the whole house up and it fell backwards and apart. and there, still  in her bed, though the bed was now in the open air, lay a little old woman who looked  as if she had dwarf blood in her. she was at deaths door, but when she opened her eyes  and saw the bright, hairy head of the lion staring into her face, she did not scream or  faint. she said, "oh, aslan! i knew it was true. ive been waiting for this all my life.  have you come to take me away?”
"yes, dearest," said aslan. "but not the long journey yet." and as he  spoke, like the flush creeping along the underside of a cloud at sunrise, the colour came back to  her white face and her eyes grew bright and she sat up and said, "why, i do declare i feel  that better. i think i could take a little breakfast this morning.”
"here you are, mother," said bacchus, dipping a pitcher in the cottage well  and handing it to her. but what was in it now was not water but the richest wine, red as  red-currant jelly, smooth as oil, strong as beef, warming as tea, cool as dew.
"eh, youve done something to our well," said the old woman. "that makes a  nice change, that does." and she jumped out of bed.
"ride on me," said aslan, and added to susan and lucy, "you two queens will  have to run now.”
"but wed like that just as well," said susan. and off they went again.
and so at last, with leaping and dancing and singing, with music and  laughter and roaring and barking and neighing, they all came to the place where mirazs army  stood flinging down their swords and holding up their hands, and peters army, still  holding their weapons and breathing hard, stood round them with stern and glad faces. and  the first thing that happened was that the old woman slipped off aslans back and ran  across to caspian and they embraced one another; for she was his old nurse.

wＷw。xiabｏok.com



CHAPTER FIFTEEN

。小＿说＿txt天堂
aslan makes a door in the air  at the sight of aslan the cheeks of the telmarine soldiers became the  colour of cold gravy, their knees knocked together, and many fell on their faces. they had  not believed  
in lions and this made their fear greater. even the red dwarfs, who knew  that he came as a friend, stood with open mouths and could not speak. some of the black  dwarfs, who had been of nikabriks party, began to edge away. but all the talking  beasts surged round the lion, with purrs and grunts and squeaks and whinneys of delight,  fawning on him with their tails, rubbing against him, touching him reverently with  their noses and going to and fro under his body and between his legs. if you have ever seen  a little cat loving a big dog whom it knows and trusts, you will have a pretty good  picture of their behaviour. then peter, leading caspian, forced his way through the crowd of  animals.
"this is caspian, sir," he said. and caspian knelt and kissed the lions  paw.
"welcome, prince," said aslan. "do you feel yourself sufficient to take up  the kingship of narnia?”
"i - i dont think i do, sir," said caspian. "im only a kid.”
"good," said aslan. "if you had felt yourself sufficient, it would have  been a proof that you were not. therefore, under us and under the high king, you shall be  king of narnia, lord of cair paravel, and emperor of the lone islands. you and your heirs  while your race lasts. and your coronation - but what have we here?" for at that  moment a curious little procession was approaching - eleven mice, six of whom carried  between them something on a litter made of branches, but the litter was no bigger than a  large atlas. no one has ever seen mice more woebegone than these. they were plastered with  mud some with blood too - and their ears were down and their whiskers drooped and  their tails dragged in the grass, and their leader piped on his slender pipe a  melancholy tune. on the litter lay what seemed little better than a damp heap of fur; all that was  left of reepicheep. he was still breathing, but more dead than alive, gashed with  innumerable wounds, one paw crushed, and, where his tail had been, a bandaged stump.
"now, lucy," said aslan.
lucy had her diamond bottle out in a moment. though only a drop was needed  on each of reepicheeps wounds, the wounds were so many that there was a long and  anxious silence before she had finished and the master mouse sprang from the  litter. his hand went at once to his sword hilt, with the other he twirled his whiskers. he  bowed.
"hail, aslan!" came his shrill voice. "i have the honour -" but then he  suddenly stopped.
the fact was that he still had no tail - whether that lucy had forgotten it  or that her cordial, though it could heal wounds, could not make things grow again.  reepicheep became aware of his loss as he made his bow; perhaps it altered something  in his balance.
he looked over his right shoulder. failing to see his tail, he strained his  neck further till he had to turn his shoulders and his whole body followed. but by that time  his hind-quarters had turned too and were out of sight. then he strained his neck  looking over his shoulder again, with the same result. only after he had turned completely  round three times did he realize the dreadful truth.
"i am confounded," said reepicheep to aslan. "i am completely out of  countenance. i must crave your indulgence for appearing in this unseemly fashion.”
"it becomes you very well, small one," said aslan.
"all the same," replied reepicheep, "if anything could be done... perhaps  her majesty?”
and here he bowed to lucy.
"but what do you want with a tail?" asked aslan.
"sir," said the mouse, "i can eat and sleep and die for my king without  one. but a tail is the honour and glory of a mouse.”
"i have sometimes wondered, friend," said aslan, "whether you do not think  too much about your honour.”
"highest of all high kings," said reepicheep, "permit me to remind you that  a very small size has been bestowed on us mice, and if we did not guard our dignity,  some (who weigh worth by inches) would allow themselves very unsuitable pleasantries  at our expense. that is why i have been at some pains to make it known that no one  who does not wish to feel this sword as near his heart as i can reach shall talk in  my presence about traps or toasted cheese or candles: no, sir - not the tallest fool in  narnia!" here he glared very fiercely up at wimbleweather, but the giant, who was always a  stage behind everyone else, had not yet discovered what was being talked about down at  his feet, and so missed the point.
"why have your followers all drawn their swords, may i ask?" said aslan.
"may it please your high majesty," said the second mouse, whose name was  peepiceek, "we are all waiting to cut off our own tails if our chief must go without  his. we will not bear the shame of wearing an honour which is denied to the high mouse.”
"ah!" roared aslan. "you have conquered me. you have great hearts. not for  the sake of your dignity, reepicheep, but for the love that is between you and your  people, and still more for the kindness your people showed me long ago when you ate away the  cords that bound me on the stone table (and it was then, though you have long  forgotten it, that you began to be talking mice), you shall have your tail again.”
before aslan had finished speaking the new tail was in its place. then, at  aslans command, peter bestowed the knighthood of the order of the lion on caspian,  and caspian, as soon as he was knighted, himself bestowed it on trufflehunter  and trumpkin and reepicheep, and made doctor cornelius his lord chancellor, and  confirmed the bulgy bear in his hereditary office of marshal of the lists. and there was  great applause.
after this the telmarine soldiers, firmly but without taunts or blows, were  taken across the ford and all put under lock and key in the town of beruna and given  beef and beer.
they made a great fuss about wading in the river, for they all hated and  feared running water just as much as they hated and feared woods and animals. but in the  end the nuisance was over: and then the nicest parts of that long day began.
lucy, sitting close to aslan and divinely comfortable, wondered what the  trees were doing. at first she thought they were merely dancing; they were certainly  going round slowly in two circles, one from left to right and the other from right to  left. then she noticed that they kept throwing something down in the centre of both  circles. sometimes she thought they were cutting off long strands of their hair; at other  times it looked as if they were breaking off bits of their fingers - but, if so, they had plenty  of fingers to spare and it did not hurt them. but whatever they were throwing down, when it  reached the ground, it became brushwood or dry sticks. then three or four of the red  dwarfs came forward with their tinder boxes and set light to the pile, which first  crackled, and then blazed, and finally roared as a woodland bonfire on midsummer night ought  to do. and everyone sat down in a wide circle round it.
then bacchus and silenus and the maenads began a dance, far wilder than the  dance of the trees; not merely a dance for fun and beauty (though it was that too)  but a magic dance of plenty, and where their hands touched, and where their feet fell,  the feast came into existence sides of roasted meat that filled the grove with delicious  smell, and wheaten cakes and oaten cakes, honey and many-coloured sugars and cream as  thick as porridge and as smooth as still water, peaches, nectarines, pomegranates,  pears, grapes, strawberries, raspberries pyramids and cataracts of fruit. then, in great  wooden cups and bowls and mazers, wreathed with ivy, came the wines; dark, thick ones like  syrups of mulberry juice, and clear red ones like red jellies liquefied, and yellow  wines and green wines and yellow-green and greenish-yellow.
but for the tree people different fare was provided. when lucy saw clodsley  shovel and his moles scuffling up the turf in various places (which bacchus had  pointed out to them)
and realized that the trees were going to eat earth it gave her rather a  shudder. but when she saw the earths that were actually brought to them she felt quite  different. they began with a rich brown loam that looked almost exactly like chocolate; so like  chocolate, in fact, that edmund tried a piece of it, but he did not find it at all nice.  when the rich loam had taken the edge off their hunger, the trees turned to an earth of the  kind you see in somerset, which is almost pink. they said it was lighter and sweeter. at  the cheese stage they had a chalky soil, and then went on to delicate confections of the  finest gravels powdered with choice silver sand. they drank very little wine, and it made  the hollies very talkative: for the most part they quenched their thirst with deep  draughts of mingled dew and rain, flavoured with forest flowers and the airy taste of the  thinnest clouds.
thus aslan feasted the narnians till long after the sunset had died away,  and the stars had come out; and the great fire, now hotter but less noisy, shone like a  beacon in the dark woods, and the frightened telmarines saw it from far away and wondered what  it might mean. the best thing of all about this feast was that there was no breaking  up or going  
away, but as the talk grew quieter and slower, one after another would  begin to nod and finally drop off to sleep with feet towards the fire and good friends on  either side, till at last there was silence all round the circle, and the chattering of water  over stone at the ford of beruna could be heard once more. but all night aslan and the moon  gazed upon each other with joyful and unblinking eyes.
next day messengers (who were chiefly squirrels and birds) were sent all  over the country with a proclamation to the scattered telmarines - including, of  course, the prisoners in beruna. they were told that caspian was now king and that  narnia would henceforth belong to the talking beasts and the dwarfs and dryads and fauns  and other creatures quite as much as to the men. any who chose to stay under the new  conditions might do so; but for those who did not like the idea, aslan would provide  another home.
anyone who wished to go there must come to aslan and the kings at the ford  of beruna by noon on the fifth day. you may imagine that this caused plenty of head- scratching among the telmarines. some of them, chiefly the young ones, had, like  caspian, heard stories of the old days and were delighted that they had come back. they  were already making friends with the creatures. these all decided to stay in narnia. but  most of the older men, especially those who had been important under miraz, were sulky  and had no wish to live in a country where they could not rule the roost. "live here  with a lot of blooming performing animals! no fear," they said. "and ghosts too," some  added with a shudder. "thats what those there dryads really are. its not canny." they  were also suspicious. "i dont trust em," they said. "not with that awful lion and  all. he wont keep his claws off us long, youll see." but then they were equally suspicious  of his offer to give them a new home. "take us off to his den and eat us one by one most  likely," they muttered. and the more they talked to one another the sulkier and more  suspicious they became. but on the appointed day more than half of them turned up.
at one end of the glade aslan had caused to be set up two stakes of wood,  higher than a mans head and about three feet apart. a third, and lighter, piece of wood  was bound across them at the top, uniting them, so that the whole thing looked like a  doorway from nowhere into nowhere. in front of this stood aslan himself with peter on  his right and caspian on his left. grouped round them were susan and lucy, trumpkin and trufflehunter, the lord cornelius, glenstorm, reepicheep, and others. the  children and the dwarfs had made good use of the royal wardrobes in what had been the  castle of miraz and was now the castle of caspian, and what with silk and cloth of  gold, with snowy linen glancing through slashed sleeves, with silver mail shirts and  jewelled sword-hilts, with gilt helmets and feathered bonnets, they were almost too bright  to look at.
even the beasts wore rich chains about their necks. yet nobodys eyes were  on them or the children. the living and strokable gold of aslans mane outshone them  all. the rest of the old narnians stood down each side of the glade. at the far end stood  the telmarines.
the sun shone brightly and pennants fluttered in the light wind.
"men of telmar," said aslan, "you who seek a new land, hear my words. i  will send you all to your own country, which i know and you do not.”
"we dont remember telmar. we dont know where it is. we dont know what it  is like,”
grumbled the telmarines.
"you came into narnia out of telmar," said aslan. "but you came into telmar  from another place. you do not belong to this world at all. you came hither,  certain generations ago, out of that same world to which the high king peter  belongs.”
at this, half the telmarines began whimpering, "there you are. told you so.  hes going to kill us all, send us right out of the world," and the other half began  throwing out their chests and slapping one another on the back and whispering, "there you are.  might have guessed we didnt belong to this place with all its queer, nasty, unnatural  creatures. were of royal blood, youll see." and even caspian and cornelius and the  children turned to aslan with looks of amazement on their faces.
"peace," said aslan in the low voice which was nearest to his growl. the  earth seemed to shake a little and every living thing in the grove became still as stone.
"you, sir caspian," said aslan, "might have known that you could be no true  king of narnia unless, like the kings of old, you were a son of adam and came from  the world of adams sons. and so you are. many years ago in that world, in a deep sea of  that world which is called the south sea, a shipload of pirates were driven by storm  on an island.
and there they did as pirates would: killed the natives and took the native  women for wives, and made palm wine, and drank and were drunk, and lay in the shade  of the palm trees, and woke up and quarrelled, and sometimes killed one another. and in  one of these frays six were put to flight by the rest and fled with their women into the  centre of the island and up a mountain, and went, as they thought, into a cave to hide.  but it was one of the magical places of that world, one of the chinks or chasms between chat  world and this. there were many chinks or chasms between worlds in old times, but  they have grown rarer. this was one of the last: i do not say the last. and so they  fell, or rose, or blundered, or dropped right through, and found themselves in this world, in  the land of telmar which was then unpeopled. but why it was unpeopled is a long story:  i will not tell it now. and in telmar their descendants lived and became a fierce and  proud people; and after many generations there was a famine in telmar and they invaded  narnia, which was then in some disorder (but that also would be a long story), and  conquered it and ruled it. do you mark all this well, king caspian?”
"i do indeed, sir," said caspian. "i was wishing that i came of a more  honourable lineage.”
"you come of the lord adam and the lady eve," said aslan. "and that is both  honour enough to erect the head of the poorest beggar, and shame enough to bow the  shoulders of the greatest emperor on earth. be content.”
caspian bowed.
"and now," said aslan, "you men and women of telmar, will you go back to  that island in the world of men from which your fathers first came? it is no bad place.  the race of those pirates who first found it has died out, and it is without  inhabitants. there are good wells of fresh water, and fruitful soil, and timber for building, and fish  in the lagoons; and the other men of that world have not yet discovered it. the chasm is open  for your return; but this i must warn you, that once you have gone through, it will close  behind you for ever. there will be no more commerce between the worlds by that door.”
there was silence for a moment. then a burly, decent looking fellow among  the telmarine soldiers pushed forward and said:  "well, ill take the offer.”
"it is well chosen," said aslan. "and because you have spoken first, strong  magic is upon you. your future in that world shall be good. come forth.”
the man, now a little pale, came forward. aslan and his court drew aside,  leaving him free access to the empty doorway of the stakes.
"go through it, my son," said aslan, bending towards him and touching the  mans nose with his own. as soon as the lions breath came about him, a new look came  into the mans eyes - startled, but not unhappy - as if he were trying to remember  something. then he squared his shoulders and walked into the door.
everyones eyes were fixed on him. they saw the three pieces of wood, and  through them the trees and grass and sky of narnia. they saw the man between the  doorposts: then, in one second, he had vanished utterly.
from the other end of the glade the remaining telmarines set up a wailing.  "ugh! whats happened to him? do you mean to murder us? we wont go that way." and then  one of the clever telmarines said:  "we dont see any other world through those sticks. if you want us to  believe in it, why doesnt one of you go? all your own friends are keeping well away from the  sticks.”
instantly reepicheep stood forward and bowed. "if my example can be of any  service, aslan," he said, "i will take eleven mice through that arch at your bidding  without a moments delay.”
"nay, little one," said aslan, laying his velvety paw ever so lightly on  reepicheeps head.
"they would do dreadful things to you in that world. they would show you at  fairs. it is others who must lead.”
"come on," said peter suddenly to edmund and lucy. "our times up.”
"what do you mean?" said edmund.
"this way," said susan, who seemed to know all about it. "back into the  trees. weve got to change.”
"change what?" asked lucy.
"our clothes, of course," said susan. "nice fools wed look on the platform  of an english station in these.”
"but our other things are at caspians castle," said edmund.
"no, theyre not," said peter, still leading the way into the thickest  wood. "theyre all here. they were brought down in bundles this morning. its all arranged.”
"was that what aslan was talking to you and susan about this morning?"  asked lucy.
"yes - that and other things," said peter, his face very solemn. "i cant  tell it to you all.
there were things he wanted to say to su and me because were not coming  back to narnia.”
"never?" cried edmund and lucy in dismay.
"oh, you two are," answered peter. "at least, from what he said, im pretty  sure he means you to get back some day. but not su and me. he says were getting too  old.”
"oh, peter," said lucy. "what awful bad luck. can you bear it?”
"well, i think i can," said peter. "its all rather different from what i  thought. youll understand when it comes to your last time. but, quick, here are our  things.”
it was odd, and not very nice, to take off their royal clothes and to come  back in their school things (not very fresh now) into that great assembly. one or two of  the nastier telmarines jeered. but the other creatures all cheered and rose up in  honour of peter the high king, and queen susan of the horn, and king edmund, and queen lucy.  there were affectionate and (on lucys part) tearful farewells with all their old  friends - animal kisses, and hugs from bulgy bears, and hands wrung by trumpkin, and a last  tickly, whiskerish embrace with trufflehunter. and of course caspian offered the  horn back to susan and of course susan told him to keep it. and then, wonderfully and  terribly, it was farewell to aslan himself, and peter took his place with susans hands on  his shoulders and edmunds on hers and lucys on his and the first of the telmarines on  lucys, and so in a long line they moved forward to the door. after that came a moment  which is hard to describe, for the children seemed to be seeing three things at once. one  was the mouth of a cave opening into the glaring green and blue of an island in the  pacific, where all the telmarines would find themselves the moment they were through the door. the  second was a glade in narnia, the faces of dwarfs and beasts, the deep eyes of  aslan, and the white patches on the badgers cheeks. but the third (which rapidly  swallowed up the  
other two) was the grey, gravelly surface of a platform in a country  station, and a seat with luggage round it, where they were all sitting as if they had never  moved from it - a little flat and dreary for a moment after all they; had been through, but  also, unexpectedly, nice in its own way, what with the familiar railway smell and  the english sky and the summer term before them.
"well!" said peter. "we have had a time.”
"bother!" said edmund. "ive left my new torch in narnia.”



 