《THE VOYAGE OF THE DAWN TREADER》查看《THE VOYAGE OF THE DAWN TREADER》书评和最新更新以及相关书籍推荐请到《THE VOYAGE OF THE DAWN TREADER》专题网址http:///waiguo/2127/ 
  



CHAPTER ONE

小,说,t，xt,天,堂
the picture in the bedroom  there was a boy called eustace clarence scrubb, and he almost deserved it.  his parents called him eustace clarence and masters called him scrubb. i cant  tell you how his friends spoke to him, for he had none. he didnt call his father and  mother "father”
and "mother", but harold and alberta. they were very up-to-date and  advanced people.
they were vegetarians, non-smokers and teetotallers and wore a special kind  of underclothes. in their house there was very little furniture and very few  clothes on beds and the windows were always open.
eustace clarence liked animals, especially beetles, if they were dead and  pinned on a card. he liked books if they were books of information and had pictures of  grain elevators or of fat foreign children doing exercises in model schools.
eustace clarence disliked his cousins the four pevensies, peter, susan,  edmund and lucy. but he was quite glad when he heard that edmund and lucy were coming  to stay.
for deep down inside him he liked bossing and bullying; and, though he was  a puny little person who couldnt have stood up even to lucy, let alone edmund, in a  fight, he knew that there are dozens of ways to give people a bad time if you are in your  own home and they are only visitors.
edmund and lucy did not at all want to come and stay with uncle harold and  aunt alberta. but it really couldnt be helped. father had got a job lecturing  in america for sixteen weeks that summer, and mother was to go with him because she hadnt  had a real holiday for ten years. peter was working very hard for an exam and he was  to spend the holidays being coached by old professor kirke in whose house these four  children had had wonderful adventures long ago in the war years. if he had still been in  that house he would have had them all to stay. but he had somehow become poor since the  old days and was living in a small cottage with only one bedroom to spare. it would  have cost too much money to take the other three all to america, and susan had gone.
grown-ups thought her the pretty one of the family and she was no good at  school work (though otherwise very old for her age) and mother said she "would get far  more out of a trip to america than the youngsters". edmund and lucy tried not to grudge  susan her luck, but it was dreadful having to spend the summer holidays at their  aunts. "but its far worse for me," said edmund, "because youll at least have a room of your  own and i shall have to share a bedroom with that record stinker, eustace.”
the story begins on an afternoon when edmund and lucy were stealing a few  precious minutes alone together. and of course they were talking about narnia, which  was the name of their own private and secret country. most of us, i suppose, have a  secret country but for most of us it is only an imaginary country. edmund and lucy were  luckier than other people in that respect. their secret country was real. they had  already visited it twice; not in a game or a dream but in reality. they had got there of  course by magic, which is the only way of getting to narnia. and a promise, or very nearly a  promise, had been made them in narnia itself that they would some day get back. you may  imagine that they talked about it a good deal, when they got the chance.
they were in lucys room, sitting on the edge of her bed and looking at a  picture on the opposite wall. it was the only picture in the house that they liked. aunt  alberta didnt like it at all (that was why it was put away in a little back room upstairs),  but she couldnt get rid of it because it had been a wedding present from someone she did not  want to offend.
it was a picture of a ship - a ship sailing straight towards you. her prow  was gilded and shaped like the head of a dragon with wide-open mouth. she had only one  mast and one large, square sail which was a rich purple. the sides of the ship - what  you could see of them where the gilded wings of the dragon ended-were green. she had just  run up to the top of one glorious blue wave, and the nearer slope of that wave came down  towards you, with streaks and bubbles on it. she was obviously running fast before a gay  wind, listing over a little on her port side. (by the way, if you are going to read this  story at all, and if you dont know already, you had better get it into your head that the left  of a ship when you are looking ahead, is port, and the right is starboard.) all the  sunlight fell on her from that side, and the water on that side was full of greens and purples. on  the other, it was darker blue from the shadow of the ship.
"the question is," said edmund, "whether it doesnt make things worse,  looking at a narnian ship when you cant get there.”
"even looking is better than nothing," said lucy. "and she is such a very  narnian ship.”
"still playing your old game?" said eustace clarence, who had been  listening outside the door and now came grinning into the room. last year, when he had been  staying with the pevensies, he had managed to hear them all talking of narnia and he loved  teasing them about it. he thought of course that they were making it all up; and as he  was far too stupid to make anything up himself, he did not approve of that.
"youre not wanted here," said edmund curtly.
"im trying to think of a limerick," said eustace. "something like this:  "some kids who played games about narnia got gradually balmier and balmier -”
"well narnia and balmier dont rhyme, to begin with," said lucy.
"its an assonance," said eustace.
"dont ask him what an assy-thingummy is," said edmund. "hes only longing  to be asked. say nothing and perhaps hell go away.”
most boys, on meeting a reception like this, would either have cleared out  or flared up.
eustace did neither. he just hung about grinning, and presently began  talking again.
"do you like that picture?" he asked.
"for heavens sake dont let him get started about art and all that," said  edmund hurriedly, but lucy, who was very truthful, had already said, "yes, i do. i  like it very much.”
"its a rotten picture," said eustace.
"you wont see it if you step outside," said edmund.
"why do you like it?" said eustace to lucy.
"well, for one thing," said lucy, "i like it because the ship looks as if  it was really moving. and the water looks as if it was really wet. and the waves look as  if they were really going up and down.”
of course eustace knew lots of answers to this, but he didnt say anything.  the reason was that at that very moment he looked at the waves and saw that they did  look very much indeed as if they were going up and down. he had only once been in a  ship (and then only as far as the isle of wight) and had been horribly seasick. the  look of the waves in the picture made him feel sick again. he turned rather green and  tried another look. and then all three children were staring with open mouths.
what they were seeing may be hard to believe when you read it in print, but  it was almost as hard to believe when you saw it happening. the things in the picture  were moving. it didnt look at all like a cinema either; the colours were too real and  clean and out-of-doors for that. down went the prow of the ship into the wave and up went a  great shock of spray. and then up went the wave behind her, and her stern and her deck  became visible for the first time, and then disappeared as the next wave came to  meet her and her bows went up again. at the same moment an exercise book which had been  lying beside edmund on the bed flapped, rose and sailed through the air to the wall  behind him, and lucy felt all her hair whipping round her face as it does on a windy day.  and this was a windy day; but the wind was blowing out of the picture towards them. and  suddenly with the wind came the noises-the swishing of waves and the slap of water  against the ships sides and the creaking and the overall high steady roar of air and water.  but it was the smell, the wild, briny smell, which really convinced lucy that she was not  dreaming.
"stop it," came eustaces voice, squeaky with fright and bad temper. "its  some silly trick you two are playing. stop it. ill tell alberta - ow!”
the other two were much more accustomed to adventures, but, just exactly as  eustace clarence said "ow," they both said "ow" too. the reason was that a great  cold, salt splash had broken right out of the frame and they were breathless from the  smack of it, besides being wet through.
"ill smash the rotten thing," cried eustace; and then several things  happened at the same time. eustace rushed towards the picture. edmund, who knew something about  magic, sprang after him, warning him to look out and not to be a fool. lucy  grabbed at him from the other side and was dragged forward. and by this time either they had  grown much smaller or the picture had grown bigger. eustace jumped to try to pull it  off the wall and found himself standing on the frame; in front of him was not glass but real  sea, and wind and waves rushing up to the frame as they might to a rock. he lost his head  and clutched at the other two who had jumped up beside him. there was a second of  struggling and shouting, and just as they thought they had got their balance a great blue  roller surged up round them, swept them off their feet, and drew them down into the sea.  eustaces despairing cry suddenly ended as the water got into his mouth.
lucy thanked her stars that she had worked hard at her swimming last summer  term. it is true that she would have got on much better if she had used a slower  stroke, and also that the water felt a great deal colder than it had looked while it was only a  picture. still, she kept her head and kicked her shoes off, as everyone ought to do who falls  into deep water in their clothes. she even kept her mouth shut and her eyes open. they were  still quite near the ship; she saw its green side towering high above them, and people  looking at her from the deck. then, as one might have expected, eustace clutched at her in  a panic and down they both went.
when they came up again she saw a white figure diving off the ships side.  edmund was close beside her now, treading water, and had caught the arms of the  howling eustace.
then someone else, whose face was vaguely familiar, slipped an arm under  her from the other side. there was a lot of shouting going on from the ship, heads  crowding together above the bulwarks, ropes being thrown. edmund and the stranger were  fastening ropes round her. after that followed what seemed a very long delay during which  her face got blue and her teeth began chattering. in reality the delay was not very  long; they were waiting till the moment when she could be got on board the ship without  being dashed against its side. even with all their best endeavours she had a bruised  knee when she finally stood, dripping and shivering, on the deck. after her edmund was  heaved up, and then the miserable eustace. last of all came the stranger - a golden-headed  boy some years older than herself.
"ca - ca - caspian!" gasped lucy as soon as she had breath enough. for  caspian it was; caspian, the boy king of narnia whom they had helped to set on the throne  during their last visit. immediately edmund recognized him too. all three shook hands  and clapped one another on the back with great delight.
"but who is your friend?" said caspian almost at once, turning to eustace  with his cheerful smile. but eustace was crying much harder than any boy of his age  has a right to cry when nothing worse than a wetting has happened to him, and would only  yell out, "let me go. let me go back. i dont like it.”
"let you go?" said caspian. "but where?”
eustace rushed to the ships side, as if he expected to see the picture  frame hanging above the sea, and perhaps a glimpse of lucys bedroom. what he saw was blue  waves flecked with foam, and paler blue sky, both spreading without a break to the  horizon. perhaps we can hardly blame him if his heart sank. he was promptly sick.
"hey! rynelf," said caspian to one of the sailors. "bring spiced wine for  their majesties.
youll need something to warm you after that dip." he called edmund and  lucy their majesties because they and peter and susan had all been kings and queens of  narnia long before his time. narnian time flows differently from ours. if you  spent a hundred years in narnia, you would still come back to our world at the very same  hour of the very same day on which you left. and then, if you went back to narnia after  spending a week here, you might find that a thousand narnian years had passed, or only a  day, or no time at all. you never know till you get there. consequently, when the pevensie  children had returned to narnia last time for their second visit, it was (for the  narnians) as if king arthur came back to britain, as some people say he will. and i say the  sooner the better.
rynelf returned with the spiced wine steaming in a flagon and four silver  cups. it was just what one wanted, and as lucy and edmund sipped it they could feel the  warmth going right down to their toes. but eustace made faces and spluttered and spat it  out and was sick again and began to cry again and asked if they hadnt any plumptrees  vitaminized nerve food and could it be made with distilled water and anyway he insisted  on being put ashore at the next station.
"this is a merry shipmate youve brought us, brother," whispered caspian to  edmund with a chuckle; but before he could say anything more eustace burst out  again.
"oh! ugh! what on earths that! take it away, the horrid thing." .
he really had some excuse this time for feeling a little surprised.  something very curious indeed had come out of the cabin in the poop and was slowly approaching  them. you might call it - and indeed it was - a mouse. but then it was a mouse on its  hind legs and stood about two feet high. a thin band of gold passed round its head under  one ear and over the other and in this was stuck a long crimson feather. (as the  mouses fur was very dark, almost black, the effect was bold and striking.) its left paw rested  on the hilt of a sword very nearly as long as its tail. its balance, as it paced gravely  along the swaying deck, was perfect, and its manners courtly. lucy and edmund recognized it  at once reepicheep, the most valiant of all the talking beasts of narnia, and the  chief mouse. it had won undying glory in the second battle of beruna. lucy longed, as she  had always  
done, to take reepicheep up in her arms and cuddle him. but this, as she  well knew, was a pleasure she could never have: it would have offended him deeply.  instead, she went down on one knee to talk to him.
reepicheep put forward his left leg, drew back his right, bowed, kissed her  hand, straightened himself, twirled his whiskers, and said in his shrill, piping  voice:  "my humble duty to your majesty. and to king edmund, too." (here he bowed  again.)
"nothing except your majesties presence was lacking to this glorious  venture.”
"ugh, take it away," wailed eustace. "i hate mice. and i never could bear  performing animals. theyre silly and vulgar and-and sentimental.”
"am i to understand," said reepicheep to lucy after a long stare at  eustace, "that this singularly discourteous person is under your majestys protection? because,  if not-”
at this moment lucy and edmund both sneezed.
"what a fool i am to keep you all standing here in your wet things," said  caspian. "come on below and get changed. ill give you my cabin of course, lucy, but im  afraid we have no womens clothes on board. youll have to make do with some of mine. lead  the way, reepicheep, like a good fellow.”
"to the convenience of a lady," said reepicheep, "even a question of honour  must give way - at least for the moment -" and here he looked very hard at eustace.  but caspian hustled them on and in a few minutes lucy found herself passing through the  door into the stern cabin. she fell in love with it at once - the three square  windows that looked out on the blue, swirling water astern, the low cushioned benches round three  sides of the table, the swinging silver lamp overhead (dwarfs work, she knew at once by  its exquisite delicacy) and the flat gold image of aslan the lion on the forward wall  above the door.
all this she took in in a flash, for caspian immediately opened a door on  the starboard side, and said, "thisll be your room, lucy. ill just get some dry things  for myself-" he was rummaging in one of the lockers while he spoke - "and then leave you to  change. if youll fling your wet things outside the door ill get them taken to the  galley to be dried.”
lucy found herself as much at home as if she had been in caspians cabin  for weeks, and the motion of the ship did not worry her, for in the old days when she had  been a queen in narnia she had done a good deal of voyaging. the cabin was very tiny but  bright with painted panels (all birds and beasts and crimson dragons and vines) and  spotlessly clean.
caspians clothes were too big for her, but she could manage. his shoes,  sandals and sea-boots were hopelessly big but she did not mind going barefoot on board  ship. when she had finished dressing she looked out of her window at the water rushing  past and took a long deep breath. she felt quite sure they were in for a lovely time.





CHAPTER TWO

小/说.t/xt.天+
on board the dawn treader  "ah, there you are, lucy," said caspian. "we were just waiting for you.  this is my captain, the lord drinian.”
a dark-haired man went down on one knee and kissed her hand. the only  others present were reepicheep and edmund.
"where is eustace?" asked lucy.
"in bed," said edmund, "and i dont think we can do anything for him. it  only makes him worse if you try to be nice to him.”
"meanwhile," said caspian, "we want to talk.”
"by jove, we do," said edmund. "and first, about time. its a year ago by  our time since we left you just before your coronation. how long has it been in narnia?”
"exactly three years," said caspian.
"all going well?" asked edmund.
"you dont suppose id have left my kingdom and put to sea unless all was  well,”
answered the king. "it couldnt be better. theres no trouble at all now  between telmarines, dwarfs, talking beasts, fauns and the rest. and we gave those  troublesome giants on the frontier such a good beating last summer that they pay us  tribute now. and i had an excellent person to leave as regent while im away trumpkin, the  dwarf. you remember him?”
"dear trumpkin," said lucy, "of course i do. you couldnt have made a  better choice.”
"loyal as a badger, maam, and valiant as - as a mouse," said drinian. he  had been going to say "as a lion" but had noticed reepicheeps eyes fixed on him.
"and where are we heading for?" asked edmund.
"well," said caspian, "thats rather a long story. perhaps you remember  that when i was a child my usurping uncle miraz got rid of seven friends of my fathers (who  might have taken my part) by sending them off to explore the unknown , eastern seas  beyond the lone islands.”
"yes," said lucy, "and none of them ever came back.”
"right. well, on, my coronation day, with aslans approval, i swore an oath  that, if once i established peace in narnia, i would sail east myself for a year and a day  to find my fathers friends or to learn of their deaths and avenge them if i could.  these were their names - the lord revilian, the lord bern, the lord argoz, the lord  mavramorn, the lord octesian, the lord restimar, and - oh, that other one whos so hard to  remember.”
"the lord rhoop, sire," said drinian.
"rhoop, rhoop, of course," said caspian. "that is my main intention. but  reepicheep here has an even higher hope." everyones eyes turned to the mouse.
"as high as my spirit," it said. "though perhaps as small as my stature.  why should we not come to the very eastern end of the world? and what might we find  there? i expect to find aslans own country. it is always from the east, across the sea, that  the great lion comes to us.”
"i say, that is an idea," said edmund in an awed voice.
"but do you think," said lucy, "aslans country would be that sort of  country - i mean, the sort you could ever sail to?”
"i do not know, madam," said reepicheep. "but there is this. when i was in  my cradle, a wood woman, a dryad, spoke this verse over me:  "where sky and water meet, where the waves grow sweet, doubt not,  reepicheep, to find all you seek, there is the utter east.
"i do not know what it means. but the spell of it has been on me all my  life.”
after a short silence lucy asked, "and where are we now, caspian?”
"the captain can tell you better than i," said caspian, so drinian got out  his chart and spread it on the table.
"thats our position," he said, laying his finger on it. "or was at noon  today. we had a fair wind from cair paravel and stood a little north for galma, which we  made on the next day. we were in port for a week, for the duke of galma made a great  tournament for his majesty and there he unhorsed many knights-”
"and got a few nasty falls myself, drinian. some of the bruises are there  still," put in caspian.
"- and unhorsed many knights," repeated drinian with a grin. "we thought  the duke would have been pleased if the kings majesty would have married his  daughter, but nothing came of that-”
"squints, and has freckles," said caspian.
"oh, poor girl," said lucy.
"and we sailed from galma," continued drinian, "and ran into a calm for the  best part of two days and had to row, and then had wind again and did not make  terebinthia till the fourth day from galma. and there their king sent out a warning not to land  for there was sickness in terebinthia, but we doubled the cape and put in at a little  creek far from the city and watered. then we had to lie off for three days before we got a  south-east wind and stood out for seven isles. the third day out a pirate (terebinthian by  her rig)
overhauled us, but when she saw us well armed she stood off after some  shooting of arrows on either part -”
"and we ought to have given her chase and boarded her and hanged every  mothers son of them," said reepicheep.
"- and in five days more we were insight of muil, which, as you know, is  the westernmost of the seven isles. then we rowed through the straits and came  about sundown into redhaven on the isle of brenn, where we were very lovingly  feasted and had victuals and water at will. we left redhaven six days ago and have made marvellously good speed, so that i hope to see the lone islands the day  after tomorrow.
the sum is, we are now nearly thirty days at sea and have sailed more than  four hundred leagues from narnia.”
"and after the lone islands?" said lucy.
"no one knows, your majesty," answered drinian. "unless the lone islanders  themselves can tell us.”
"they couldnt in our days," said edmund.
"then," said reepicheep, "it is after the lone islands that the adventure  really begins.”
caspian now suggested that they might like to be shown over the ship before  supper, but lucys conscience smote her and she said, "i think i really must go and see  eustace.
seasickness is horrid, you know. if i had my old cordial with me i could  cure him.”
"but you have," said caspian. "id quite forgotten about it. as you left it  behind i thought it might be regarded as one of the royal treasures and so i brought it - if  you think it ought to be wasted on a thing like seasickness.”
"itll only take a drop," said lucy.
caspian opened one of the lockers beneath the bench and brought out the  beautiful little diamond flask which lucy remembered so well. "take back your own, queen,"  he said.
they then left the cabin and went out into the sunshine.
in the deck there were two large, long hatches, fore and aft of the mast,  and both open, as they always were in fair weather, to let light and air into the belly of  the ship. caspian led them down a ladder into the after hatch. here they found themselves in a  place where benches for rowing ran from side to side and the light came in through the  oarholes and danced on the roof. of course caspians ship was not that horrible thing, a  galley rowed by slaves. oars were used only when wind failed or for getting in and out  of harbour and everyone (except reepicheep whose legs were too short) had often taken a  turn. at each side of the ship the space under the benches was left clear for the rowers  feet, but all down the centre there was a kind of pit which went down to the very keel  and this was filled with all kinds of things - sacks of flour, casks of water and beer,  barrels of pork, jars of honey, skin bottles of wine, apples, nuts, cheeses, biscuits,  turnips, sides of bacon.
from the roof - that is, from the under side of the deck - hung hams and  strings of onions, and also the men of the watch offduty in their hammocks. caspian led them  aft, stepping from bench to bench; at least, it was stepping for him, and something  between a step and a jump for lucy, and a real long jump for reepicheep. in this way they came  to a partition with a door in it. caspian opened the door and led them into a  cabin which filled the stern underneath the deck cabins in the poop. it was of course not so  nice. it was very low and the sides sloped together as they went down so that there was  hardly any floor; and though it had windows of thick glass, they were not made to open  because they were under water. in fact at this very moment, as the ship pitched they were  alternately golden with sunlight and dim green with the sea.
"you and i must lodge here, edmund," said caspian. "well leave your  kinsman the bunk and sling hammocks for ourselves.”
"i beseech your majesty-" said drinian.
"no, no shipmate," said caspian, "we have argued all that out already. you  and rhince”
(rhince was the mate) "are sailing the ship and will have cares and labours  many a night when we are singing catches or telling stories, so you and he must have the  port cabin above. king edmund and i can lie very snug here below. but how is the  stranger?”
eustace, very green in the face, scowled and asked whether there was any  sign of the storm getting less. but caspian said, "what storm?" and drinian burst out  laughing.
"storm, young master!" he roared. "this is as fair weather as a man could  ask for.”
"whos that?" said eustace irritably. "send him away. his voice goes  through my head.”
"ive brought you something that will make you feel better, eustace," said  lucy.
"oh, go away and leave me alone," growled eustace. but he took a drop from  her flask, and though he said it was beastly stuff (the smell in the cabin when she  opened it was delicious) it is certain that his face came the right colour a few moments  after he had swallowed it, and he must have felt better because, instead of wailing  about the storm and  
his head, he began demanding to be put ashore and said that at the first  port he would "lodge a disposition" against them all with the british consul. but when  reepicheep asked what a disposition was and how you lodged it (reepicheep thought it  was some new way of arranging a single combat) eustace could only reply, "fancy not  knowing that." in the end they succeeded in convincing eustace that they were  already sailing as fast as they could towards the nearest land they knew, and that they had no  more power of sending him back to cambridge - which was where uncle harold lived -  than of sending him to the moon. after that he sulkily agreed to put on the fresh  clothes which had been put out for him and come on deck.
caspian now showed them over the ship, though indeed they had seen most it  already.
they went up on the forecastle and saw the look-out man standing on a  little shelf inside the gilded dragons neck and peering through its open mouth. inside the  forecastle was the galley (or ships kitchen) and quarters for such people as the  boatswain, the carpenter, the cook and the master-archer. if you think it odd to have the galley in  the bows and imagine the smoke from its chimney streaming back over the ship, that is  because you are thinking of steamships where there is always a headwind. on a sailing ship  the wind is coming from behind, and anything smelly is put as far forward as possible.  they were taken up to the fighting top, and at first it was rather alarming to rock  to and fro there and see the deck looking small and far away beneath. you realized that if you  fell there was no particular reason why you should fall on board rather than in the sea.  then they were taken to the poop, where rhince was on duty with another man at the great  tiller, and behind that the dragons tail rose up, covered with gilding, and round  inside it ran a little bench. the name of the ship was dawn treader. she was only a little bit of  a thing compared with one of our i ships, or even with the cogs, dromonds, carracks  and galleons which narnia had owned when lucy and edmund had reigned there under peter  as the high king, for nearly all navigation had died out in the reigns of  caspians ancestors.
when his uncle, miraz the usurper, had sent the seven lords to sea, they  had had to buy a galmian ship and man it with hired galmian sailors. but now caspian had  begun to teach the narnians to be sea-faring folk once more, and the dawn treader was the  finest ship he had built yet. she was so small that, forward of the mast, there was  hardly any deck room between the central hatch and the ships boat on one side and the hen -coop (lucy fed the hens) on the other. but she was a beauty of her kind, a "lady" as  sailors say, her lines perfect, her colours pure, and every spar and rope and pin lovingly  made. eustace of course would be pleased with nothing, and kept on boasting about liners and  motor-boats and aeroplanes and submarines ("as if he knew anything about them,"  muttered edmund), but the other two were delighted with the dawn treader, and when  they returned aft to the cabin and supper, and saw the whole western sky lit up  with an immense crimson sunset, and felt the quiver of the ship, and tasted the  salt on their lips, and thought of unknown lands on the eastern rim of the world, lucy felt  that she was almost too happy to speak.
what eustace thought had best be told in his own words, for when they all  got their clothes back, dried, next morning, he at once got out a little black  notebook and a pencil and started to keep a diary. he always had this notebook with him and kept  a record of his marks in it, for though he didnt care much about any subject for its  own sake, he  
cared a great deal about marks and would even go to people and say, "i got  so much.
what did you get?" but as he didnt seem likely to get many marks on the  dawn treader he now started a diary. this was the first entry.
"7 august. have now been twenty-four hours on this ghastly boat if it isnt  a dream. all the time a frightful storm has been raging (its a good thing im not  seasick). huge waves keep coming in over the front and i have seen the boat nearly go under any  number of times. all the others pretend to take no notice of this, either from swank  or because harold says one of the most cowardly things ordinary people do is to shut  their eyes to facts. its madness to come out into the sea in a rotten little thing like  this. not much bigger than a lifeboat. and, of course, absolutely primitive indoors. no  proper saloon, no radio, no bathrooms, no deck-chairs. i was dragged all over it yesterday  evening and it would make anyone sick to hear caspian showing off his funny little toy  boat as if it was the queen mary. i tried to tell him what real ships are like, but hes too  dense. e. and l., o f course, didnt back me up. i suppose a kid like l. doesnt realize the  danger and e. is buttering up c. as everyone does here. they call him a king. i said i was a  republican but he had to ask me what that meant! he doesnt seem to know anything at  all. needless to say ive been put in the worst cabin of the boat, a perfect dungeon, and  lucy has been given a whole room on deck to herself, almost a nice room compared with the  rest of this place. c. says thats because shes a girl. i tried to make him see what  alberta says, that all that sort of thing is really lowering girls but he was too dense.  still, he might see that i shall be ill if im kept in that hole any longer. e. says we mustnt  grumble because c. is sharing it with us himself to make room for l. as if that didnt make it  more crowded and far worse. nearly forgot to say that there is also a kind of mouse thing  that gives everyone the most frightful cheek. the others can put up with it if they  like but i shall twist his tail pretty soon if he tries it on me. the food is frightful  too.”
the trouble between eustace and reepicheep arrived even sooner than might  have been expected. before dinner next day, when the others were sitting round the  table , waiting (being at sea gives one a magnificent appetite), eustace came rushing in,  wringing his hand and shouting out:  "that little brute has half killed me. i insist on it being kept under  control. i could bring an action against you, caspian. i could order you to have it destroyed.”
at the same moment reepicheep appeared. his sword was drawn and his  whiskers looked very fierce but he was as polite as ever.
"i ask your pardons all," he said, "and especially her majestys. if i had  known that he would take refuge here i would have awaited a more reasonable time for his  correction.”
"what on earths up?" asked edmund.
what had really happened was this. reepicheep, who never felt that the ship  was getting on fast enough, loved to sit on the bulwarks far forward just beside the  dragons head, gazing out at the eastern horizon and singing softly in his little  chirruping voice the song  
the dryad had made for him. he never held on to anything, however the ship  pitched, and kept his balance with perfect ease; perhaps his long tail, hanging down to  the deck inside the bulwarks, made this easier. everyone on board was familiar with this  habit, and the sailors liked it because when one was on look-out duty it gave one somebody  to talk to.
why exactly eustace had slipped and reeled and stumbled all the way forward  to the forecastle (he had not yet got his sea-legs) i never heard. perhaps he  hoped he would see land, or perhaps he wanted to hang about the galley and scrounge something.  anyway, as soon as he saw that long tail hanging down - and perhaps it was rather  tempting - he thought it would be delightful to catch hold of it, swing reepicheep round  by it once or twice upside-down, then run away and laugh, at first the plan seemed to  work beautifully. the mouse was not much heavier than a very large cat. eustace  had him off the rail in a trice and very silly he looked (thought eustace) with his  little limbs all splayed out and his mouth open. but unfortunately reepicheep, who had  fought for his life many a time, never lost his head even for a moment. nor his skill. it  is not very easy to draw ones sword when one is swinging round in the air by ones tail,  but he did. and the next thing eustace knew was two agonizing jabs in his hand which made  him let go of the tail; and the next thing after that was that the mouse had picked  itself up again as if it were a ball bouncing off the deck, and there it was facing him, and a  horrid long, bright, sharp thing like a skewer was waving to and fro within an inch of  his stomach.
(this doesnt count as below the belt for mice in narnia because they can  hardly be expected to reach higher.)
"stop it," spluttered eustace, "go away. put that thing away. its not  safe. stop it, i say. ill tell caspian.
ill have you muzzled and tied up.”
"why do you not draw your own sword, poltroon!" cheeped the mouse. "draw  and fight or ill beat you black and blue with the flat.”
"i havent got one," said eustace. "im a pacifist. i dont believe in  fighting.”
"do i understand," said reepicheep, withdrawing his sword for a moment and  speaking very sternly, "that you do not intend to give me satisfaction?”
"i dont know what you mean," said eustace, nursing his hand. "if you dont  know how to take a joke i shant bother my head about you.”
"then take that," said reepicheep, "and that - to teach you manners - and  the respect due to a knight - and a mouse - and a mouses tail -" and at each word he gave  eustace a blow with the side of his rapier, which was thin, fine dwarf-tempered steel and  as supple and effective as a birch rod. eustace (of course) was at a school where they  didnt have corporal punishment, so the sensation was quite new to him. that was why,  in spite of having no sealegs, it took him less than a minute to get off that  forecastle and cover the whole length of the deck and burst in at the cabin door - still hotly  pursued by  
reepicheep. indeed it seemed to eustace that the rapier as well as the  pursuit was hot. it might have been red-hot by the feel.
there was not much difficulty in settling the matter once eustace realized  that everyone took the idea of a duel seriously and heard caspian offering to lend him a  sword, and drinian and edmund discussing whether he ought to be handicapped in some  way to make up for his being so much bigger than reepicheep. he apologized sulkily  and went off with lucy to have his hand bathed and bandaged and then went to his  bunk. he was careful to lie on his side.





CHAPTER THREE

　ｗｗｗ．lzuo wen．ｃｏｍ
the lone islands  "land in sight," shouted the man in the bows.
lucy, who had been talking to rhince on the poop, came pattering down the  ladder and raced forward. as she went she was joined by edmund, and they found  caspian, drinian and reepicheep already on the forecastle. it was a coldish morning, the sky  very pale and the sea very dark blue with little white caps of foam, and there, a little  way off on the starboard bow, was the nearest of the lone islands, felimath, like a low  green hill in the sea, and behind it, further off, the grey slopes of its sister doorn.
"same old felimath! same old doorn," said lucy, clapping her hands. "oh -  edmund, how long it is since you and i saw them last!”
"ive never understood why they belong to narnia," said caspian. "did peter  the high king conquer them?”
"oh no," said edmund. "they were narnian before our time - in the days of  the white witch.”
(by the way, i have never yet heard how these remote islands became  attached to the crown of narnia; if i ever do, and if the story is at all interesting, i  may put it in some other book.)
"are we to put in here, sire?" asked drinian.
"1 shouldnt think it would be much good landing on felimath," said edmund.  "it was almost uninhabited in our days and it looks as if it was the same still.  the people lived mostly on doorn and a little on avra - thats the third one; you cant see  it yet. they only kept sheep on felimath.”
"then well have to double that cape, i suppose," said drinian, "and land  on doorn.
thatll mean rowing.”
"im sorry were not landing on felimath," said lucy. "id like to walk  there again. it was so lonely - a nice kind of loneliness, and all grass and clover and soft  sea air.”
"id love to stretch my legs now too," said caspian. "i tell you what. why  shouldnt we go ashore in the boat and send it back, and then we could walk across felimath  and let the dawn treader pick us up on the other side?”
if caspian had been as experienced then as he became later on in this  voyage he would not have made this suggestion; but at the moment it seemed an excellent  one. "oh do lets," said lucy.
"youll come, will you?" said caspian to eustace, who had come on deck with  his hand bandaged.
"anything to get off this blasted boat," said eustace.
"blasted?" said drinian. "how do you mean?”
"in a civilized country like where i come from," said eustace, "the ships  are so big that when youre inside you wouldnt know you were at sea at all.”
"in that case you might just as well stay ashore," said caspian. "will you  tell them to lower the boat, drinian.”
the king, the mouse, the two pevensies, and eustace all got into the boat  and were pulled to the beach of felimath. when the boat had left them and was being  rowed back they all turned and looked round. they were surprised at how small the dawn  treader looked.
lucy was of course barefoot, having kicked off her shoes while swimming,  but that is no hardship if one is going to walk on downy turf. it was delightful to be  ashore again and to smell the earth and grass, even if at first the ground seemed to be  pitching up and down like a ship, as it usually does for a while if one has been at sea. it was  much warmer here than it had been on board and lucy found the sand pleasant to her feet as  they crossed it.
there was a lark singing.
they struck inland and up a fairly steep, though low, hill. at the top of  course they looked back, and there was the dawn treader shining like a great bright  insect and crawling slowly north-westward with her oars. then they went over the ridge  and could see her no longer.
doom now lay before them, divided from felimath by a channel about a mile  wide; behind it and to the left lay avra. the little white town of narrowhaven on  doorn was easily seen.
"hullo! whats this?" said edmund suddenly.
in the green valley to which they were descending six or seven rough- looking men, all armed, were sitting by a tree.
"dont tell them who we are," said caspian.
"and pray, your majesty, why not?" said reepicheep who had consented to  ride on lucys shoulder.
"it just occurred to me," replied caspian, "that no one here can have heard  from narnia for a long time. its just possible they may not still acknowledge our  over-lordship. in which case it might not be quite safe to be known as the king.”
"we have our swords, sire," said reepicheep.
"yes, reep, i know we have," said caspian. "but if it is a question of re- conquering the three islands, id prefer to come back with a rather larger army.”
by this time they were quite close to the strangers, one of whom - a big  black-haired fellow - shouted out, "a good morning to you.”
"and a good morning to you," said caspian. "is there still a governor of  the lone islands?”
"to be sure there is," said the man, "governor gumpas. his sufficiency is  at narrowhaven. but youll stay and drink with us.”
caspian thanked him, though neither he nor the others much liked the look  of their new acquaintance, and all of them sat down. but hardly had they raised their  cups to their lips when the black-haired man nodded to his companions and, as quick as  lightning, all the five visitors found themselves wrapped in strong arms. there was a moments  struggle but all the advantages were on one side, and soon everyone was disarmed and  had their hands tied behind their backs except reepicheep, writhing in his captors  grip and biting furiously.
"careful with that beast, tacks," said the leader. "dont damage him. hell  fetch the best price of the lot, i shouldnt wonder.”
"coward! poltroon!" squeaked reepicheep. "give me my sword and free my paws  if you dare.”
"whew!" whistled the slave merchant (for that is what he was). "it can  talk! well i never did. blowed if i take less than two hundred crescents for him." the  calormen crescent, which is the chief coin in those parts, is worth about a third of a pound.
"so thats what you are," said caspian. "a kidnapper and slaver. i hope  youre proud of it.”
"now, now, now, now," said the slaver. "dont you start any jaw. the easier  you take it, the pleasanter all round, see? i dont do this for fun. ive got my living  to make same as anyone else.”
"where will you take us?" asked lucy, getting the words out with some  difficulty.
"over to narrowhaven," said the slaver. "for market day tomorrow.”
"is there a british consul there?" asked eustace.
"is there a which?" said the man.
but long before eustace was tired of trying to explain, the slaver simply  said, "well, ive had enough of this jabber. the mouse is a fair treat but this one would  talk the hind leg off a donkey. off we go, mates.”
then the four human prisoners were roped together, not cruelly but  securely, and made to march down to the shore. reepicheep was carried. he had stopped biting on a  threat of having his mouth tied up, but he had a great deal to say, and lucy really  wondered how any man could bear to have the things said to him which were said to the  slave dealer by the mouse. but the slave dealer, far from objecting, only said "go on"  whenever reepicheep paused for breath, occasionally adding, "its as good as a  play," or, "blimey, you cant help almost thinking it knows what its saying!" or "was it one  of you what trained it?" this so infuriated reepicheep that in the end the number of  things he thought of saying all at once nearly suffocated him and he became silent.
when they got down to the shore that looked towards doorn they found a  little village and a long-boat on the beach and, lying a little further out, a dirty  bedraggled looking ship.
"now, youngsters," said the slave dealer, "lets have no fuss and then  youll have nothing to cry about. all aboard.”
at that moment a fine-looking bearded man came out of one of the houses (an  inn, i think) and said:  "well, pug. more of your usual wares?”
the slaver, whose name seemed to be pug, bowed very low, and said in a  wheedling kind of voice, "yes, please your lordship.”
"how much do you want for that boy?" asked the other, pointing to caspian.
"ah," said pug, "i knew your lordship would pick on the best. no deceiving  your lordship with anything second rate. that boy, now, ive taken a fancy to  him myself. got kind of fond of him, i have. im that tender-hearted i didnt ever ought to  have taken up this job. still, to a customer like your lordship-”
"tell me your price, carrion," said the lord sternly. "do you think i want  to listen to the rigmarole of your filthy trade?”
"three hundred crescents, my lord to your honourable lordship, but to  anyone else -”
"ill give you a hundred and fifty.”
"oh please, please," broke in lucy. "dont separate us, whatever you do.  you dont know -" but then she stopped for she saw that caspian didnt even now want to be  known.
"a hundred and fifty, then," said the lord. "as for you, little maiden, i  am sorry i cannot buy you all. unrope my boy, pug. and look - treat these others well while  they are in your hands or itll be the worse for you.”
"well!" said pug. "now who ever heard of a gentleman in my way of business  who treated his stock better than what i do? well? why, i treat em like my own  childen.”
"thats likely enough to be true," said the other grimly.
the dreadful moment had now come. caspian was untied and his new master  said, "this way, lad," and lucy burst into tears and edmund looked very blank. but  caspian looked over his shoulder and said, "cheer up. im sure it will come all right in  the end. so long.”
"now, missie," said pug. "dont you start taking on and spoiling your looks  for the market tomorrow. you be a good girl and then you wont have nothing to cry  about, see?”
then they were rowed out to the slave-ship and taken below into a long,  rather dark place, none too clean, where they found many other unfortunate prisoners;  for pug was of course a pirate and had just returned from cruising among the islands and  capturing what he could. the children didnt meet anyone whom they knew; the prisoners  were mostly galmians and terebinthians. and there they sat in the straw and wondered  what was happening to caspian and tried to stop eustace talking as if everyone  except himself was to blame.
meanwhile caspian was having a much more interesting time. the man who had  bought him led him down a little lane between two of the village houses and so out  into an open place behind the village. then he turned and faced him.
"you neednt be afraid of me, boy," he said. "ill treat you well. i bought  you for your face. you reminded me of someone."   "may i ask of whom, my lord?" said caspian.
"you remind me of my master, king caspian of narnia.”
then caspian decided to risk everything on one stroke.
"my lord," he said, "i am your master. i am caspian king of narnia.”
"you make very free," said the other. "how shall i know this is true?”
"firstly by my face," said caspian. "secondly because i know within six  guesses who you are. you are one of those seven lords of narnia whom my uncle miraz  sent to sea and whom i have come out to look for - argoz, bern, octesian, restimar,  mavramorn, or - or - i have forgotten the others. and finally, if your lordship will give  me a sword i will prove on any mans body in clean battle that i am caspian the son of  caspian, lawful king of narnia, lord of cair paravel, and emperor of the lone islands.”
"by heaven," exclaimed the man, "it is his fathers very voice and trick of  speech. my liege - your majesty -" and there in the field he knelt and kissed the  kings hand.
"the moneys your lordship disbursed for our person will be made good from  our own treasury," said caspian.
"theyre not in pugs purse yet, sire," said the lord bern, for he it was.  "and never will be, i trust. i have moved his sufficiency the governor a hundred times to  crush this vile traffic in mans flesh.”
"my lord bern," said caspian, "we must talk of the state of these islands.  but first what is your lordships own story?”
"short enough, sire," said bern. "i came thus far with my six fellows,  loved a girl of the islands, and felt i had had enough of the sea. and there was no purpose in  returning to narnia while your majestys uncle held the reins. so i married and have  lived here ever since.”
"and what is this governor, this gumpas, like? does he still acknowledge  the king of narnia for his lord?”
"in words, yes. all is done in the kings name. but he would not be best  pleased to find a real, live king of narnia coming in upon him. and if your majesty came  before him alone and unarmed - well he would not deny his allegiance, but he would  pretend to disbelieve you. your graces life would be in danger. what following has  your majesty in these waters?”
"there is my ship just rounding the point," said caspian. "we are about  thirty swords if it came to fighting. shall we not have my ship in and fall upon pug and free  my friends whom he holds captive?”
"not by my counsel," said bern. "as soon as there was a fight two or three  ships would put out from narrowhaven to rescue pug. your majesty must work by a show of  more power than you really have, and by the terror of the kings name. it must  not come to plain battle. gumpas is a chicken-hearted man and can be over-awed.”
after a little more conversation caspian and bern walked down to the coast  a little west of the village and there caspian winded his horn. (this was not the great  magic horn of narnia, queen susans horn: he had left that at home for his regent  trumpkin to use if any great need fell upon the land in the kings absence.) drinian, who was  on the look-out for a signal, recognized the royal horn at once and the dawn treader  began standing in to shore. then the boat put off again and in a few moments caspian and  the lord bern were on deck explaining the situation to drinian. he, just like caspian,  wanted to lay the dawn treader alongside the slave-ship at once and board her, but bern made  the same objection.
"steer straight down this channel, captain," said bern, "and then round to  avra where my own estates are. but first run up the kings banner, hang out all the  shields, and send as many men to the fighting top as you can. and about five bowshots hence,  when you get open sea on your port bow, run up a few signals.”
"signals? to whom?" said drinian.
"why, to all the other ships we havent got but which it might be well that  gumpas thinks we have.”
"oh, i see," said drinian rubbing his hands. "and  theyll read our signals. what shall i say? whole fleet round the south of  avra and assemble at -?”
"bernstead," said the lord bern. "thatll do excellently. their whole  journey - if there were any ships what caspian did there would be out of sight from  narrowhaven.”
caspian was sorry for the others languishing in the hold of pugs slave- ship, but he could not help finding the rest of that day enjoyable. late in the afternoon (for  they had to do all by oar), having turned to starboard round the northeast end of doorn  and port again  
round the point of avra, they entered into a good harbour on avras  southern shore where berns pleasant lands sloped down to the waters edge. berns people, many  of whom they saw working in the fields, were all freemen and it was a happy and  prosperous fief. here they all went ashore and were royally feasted in a low, pillared house  overlooking the bay. bern and his gracious wife and merry daughters made them good cheer.  but after dark bern sent a messenger over by boat to doorn to order some preparations  (he did not say exactly what) for the following day.





CHAPTER FOUR

wwww.xiabｏok.com
what caspian did there  nert morning the lord bern called his guests early, and after breakfast he  asked caspian to order every man he had into full armour. "and above all," he added, "let  everything be as trim and scoured as if it were the morning of the first battle in a  great war between noble kings with all the world looking on." this was done; and then in  three boatloads caspian and his people, and bern with a few of his, put out for  narrowhaven. the kings flag flew in the stern of his boat and his trumpeter was with him.
when they reached the jetty at narrowhaven, caspian found a considerable  crowd assembled to meet them. "this is what i sent word about last night," said  bern. "they are all friends of mine and honest people." and as soon as caspian stepped  ashore the crowd broke out into hurrahs and shouts of, "narnia! narnia! long live the king."  at the same moment - and this was also due to berns messengers - bells began ringing  from many parts of the town. then caspian caused his banner to be advanced and his  trumpet to be blown and every man drew his sword and set his face into a joyful  sternness, and they marched up the street so that the street shook, and their armour shone (for  it was a sunny morning) so that one could hardly look at it steadily.
at first the only people who cheered were those who had been warned by  berns messenger and knew what was happening and wanted it to happen. but then all  the children joined in because they liked a procession and had seen very few.  and then all the schoolboys joined in because they also liked processions and felt that  the more noise and disturbance there was the less likely they would be to have any school  that morning.
and then all the old women put their heads out of doors and windows and  began chattering and cheering because it was a king, and what is a governor  compared with that? and all the young women joined in for the same reason and also  because caspian and drinian and the rest were so handsome. and then all the young men came  to see what the young women were looking at, so that by the time caspian reached the  castle gates, nearly the whole town was shouting; and where gumpas sat in the castle,  muddling and messing about with accounts and forms and rules and regulations, he heard  the noise.
at the castle gate caspians trumpeter blew a blast and cried, "open for  the king of narnia, come to visit his trusty and wellbeloved servant the governor of  the lone islands." in those days everything in the islands was done in a slovenly,  slouching manner. only the little postern opened, and out came a tousled fellow with  a dirty old hat on his head instead of a helmet, and a rusty old pike in his hand. he  blinked at the flashing figures before him. "carn - seez - fishansy," he mumbled which was  his way of saying, -"you cant see his sufficiency"). "no interviews without  pointments cept tween nine n ten p.m. second saturday every month.”
"uncover before narnia, you dog," thundered the lord bern, and dealt him a  rap with his gauntleted hand which sent his hat flying from his head.
"ere? wots it all about?" began the doorkeeper, but no one took any  notice of him. two of caspians men stepped through the postern and after some struggling with  bars and bolts (for everything was rusty) flung both wings of the gate wide open.  then the king and his followers strode into the courtyard. here a number of the  governors guards were lounging about and several more (they were mostly wiping their mouths) came  tumbling out of various doorways. though their armour was in a disgraceful  condition, these were fellows who might have fought if they had been led or had known what was  happening; so this was the dangerous moment. caspian gave them no time to think.
"where is the captain?" he asked.
"i am, more or less, if you know what i mean," said a languid and rather  dandified young person without any j armour at all.
"it is our wish," said caspian, "that our royal visitation to our realm of  the lone islands should, if possible, be an occasion of joy and not of terror to our loyal  subjects. if it were not for that, i should have something to say about the state of your mens  armour and weapons. as it is, you are pardoned. command a cask of wine to be opened  that, your men may drink our health. but at noon tomorrow i wish to see them here in  this courtyard looking like men-at-arms and not like vagabonds. see to it on pain of our  extreme displeasure.”
the captain gaped but bern immediately cried, "three. cheers for the king,"  and the soldiers, who had understood about the cask of wine even if they understood  nothing else, joined in. caspian then ordered most of his own men to remain in the  courtyard. he, with bern and drinian and four others, went into the hall.
behind a table at the far end with various secretaries about him sat his  sufficiency, the governor of the lone islands. gumpas was a bilious-looking man with hair  that had once been red and was now mostly grey. he glanced up as the strangers entered  and then looked down at his papers saying automatically, "no interviews without  appointments except between nine and ten p.m. on second saturdays.”
caspian nodded to bern and then stood aside. bern and drinian took a step  forward and each seized one end of the table. they lifted it, and flung it on one side  of the hall where it rolled over, scattering a cascade of letters, dossiers, ink-pots, pens,  sealing-wax and documents. then, not roughly but as firmly as if their hands were pincers  of steel, they plucked gumpas out of his chair and deposited him, facing it, about four  feet away.
caspian at once sat down in the chair and laid his naked sword across his  knees.
"my lord," said he, fixing his eyes on gumpas, "you have not given us quite  the welcome we expected. i am the king of narnia.”
"nothing about it in the correspondence," said the governor. "nothing in  the minutes. we have not been notified of any such thing. all irregular. happy to consider  any applications-”
"and we are come to enquire into your sufficiencys conduct of your  office," continued caspian. "there are two points especially on which i require an  explanation. firstly i find no record that the tribute due from these islands to the crown of narnia  has been received for about a hundred and fifty years.”
"that would be a question to raise at the council next month," said gumpas.  "if anyone moves that a commission of enquiry be set up to report on the financial  history of the islands at the first meeting next year, why then . . .”
"i also find it very clearly written in our laws," caspian went on, "that  if the tribute is not delivered the whole debt has to be paid by the governor of the lone islands  out of his private purse.”
at this gumpas began to pay real attention. "oh, thats quite out of the  question," he said.
"it is an economic impossibility - er - your majesty must be joking.”
inside, he was wondering if there were any way of getting rid of these  unwelcome visitors. had he known that caspian had only one ship and one ships  company with him, he would have spoken soft words for the moment, and hoped to have them all  surrounded and killed during the night. but he had seen a ship of war sail down the  straits yesterday and seen it signalling, as he supposed, to its consorts. he had not then  known it was the kings ship for there was not wind enough to spread the flag out and make  the golden lion visible, so he had waited further developments. now he imagined that  caspian had a whole fleet at bernstead. it would never have occurred to gumpas that  anyone would walk into narrowhaven to take the islands with less than fifty men; it was  certainly not at all the kind of thing he could imagine doing himself.
"secondly," said caspian, "i want to know why you have permitted this  abominable and unnatural traffic in slaves to grow up here, contrary to the ancient custom  and usage of our dominions.”
"necessary, unavoidable," said his sufficiency. "an essential part of the  economic development of the islands, i assure you. our present burst of prosperity  depends on it.”
"what need have you of slaves?”
"for export, your majesty. sell em to calormen mostly; and we have other  markets. we are a great centre of the trade.”
"in other words," said caspian, "you dont need them. tell me what purpose  they serve except to put money into the pockets of such as pug?”
"your majestys tender years," said gumpas, with what was meant to be a  fatherly smile, "hardly make it possible that you should understand the economic problem  involved. i have statistics, i have graphs, i have-”
"tender as my years be," said caspian, "i believe i understand the slave  trade from within quite as well as your sufficiency. and i do not see that it brings  into the islands meat or bread or beer or wine or timber or cabbages or books or instruments  of music or horses or armour or anything else worth having. but whether it does or not,  it must be stopped.”
"but that would be putting the clock back," gasped the governor. "have you  no idea of progress, of development?”
"i have seen them both in an egg," said caspian. "we call it `going bad in  narnia. this trade must stop.”
"i can take no responsibility for any such measure," said gumpas.
"very well, then," answered caspian, "we relieve you of your office. my  lord bern, come here." and before gumpas quite realized what was happening, bern was  kneeling with his hands between the kings hands and taking the oath to govern the  lone islands in accordance with the old customs, rights, usages and laws of narnia. and  caspian said, "i think we have had enough of governors," and made bern a duke, the duke  of the lone islands.
"as for you, my lord," he said to gumpas, "i forgive you your debt for the  tribute. but before noon tomorrow you and yours must be out of the castle, which is now  the dukes residence.”
"look here, this is all very well," said one of gumpass secretaries, "but  suppose all you gentlemen stop playacting and we do a little business. the question before  us really is-”
"the question is," said the duke, "whether you and the rest of the rabble  will leave without a flogging or with one. you may choose which you prefer.”
when all this had been pleasantly settled, caspian ordered horses, of which  there were a few in the castle, though very ill-groomed and he, with bern and drinian  and a few others, rode out into the town and made for the slave market. it was a long  low building near the harbour and the scene which they found going on inside was very  much like any other auction; that is to say, there was a great crowd and pug, on a  platform, was roaring out in a raucous voice:  "now, gentlemen, lot twenty-three. fine terebinthian agricultural labourer,  suitable for the mines or the galleys. under twenty-five years of age. not a bad tooth  in his head.
good, brawny fellow. take off his shirt, tacks, and let the gentlemen see.  theres muscle for you! look at the chest on him. ten crescents from the gentleman in the  corner. you must be joking, sir. fifteen! eighteen! eighteen is bidden for lot twenty- three. any advance on eighteen? twenty-one. thank you, sir. twenty-one is bidden-”
but pug stopped and gaped when he saw the mail-clad figures who had clanked  up to the platform.
"on your knees, every man of you, to the king of narnia," said the duke.  everyone heard the horses jingling and stamping outside and many had heard some  rumour of the landing and the events at the castle. most obeyed. those who did not were  pulled down by their neighbours. some cheered.
"your life is forfeit, pug, for laying hands on our royal person  yesterday," said caspian.
"but your ignorance is pardoned. the slave trade was forbidden in all our  dominions quarter of an hour ago. i declare every slave in this market free.”
he held up his hand to check the cheering of the slaves and went on, "where  are my friends?”
"that dear little gel and the nice young gentleman?" said pug with an  ingratiating smile.
"why, they were snapped up at once-”
"were here, were here, caspian," cried lucy and edmund together and, "at  your service, sire," piped reepicheep from another corner. they had all been  sold but the men who had bought them were staying to bid for other slaves and so they had  not yet been taken away. the crowd parted to let the three of them out and there was  great handclasping and greeting between them and caspian. two merchants of  calormen at once approached. the calormen have dark faces and long beards. they wear  flowing robes and orange-coloured turbans, and they are a wise, wealthy, courteous,  cruel and ancient people. they bowed most politely to caspian and paid him long  compliments, all about the fountains of prosperity irrigating the gardens of prudence and  virtue - and things like that - but of course what they wanted was the money they had  paid.
"that is only fair, sirs," said caspian. "every man who has bought a slave  today must have his money back. pug, bring out your takings to the last minim." (a  minim is the fortieth part of a crescent.)
"does your good majesty mean to beggar me?" whined pug.
"you have lived on broken hearts all your life," said caspian, "and if you  are beggared, it is better to be a beggar than a slave. but where is my other friend?”
"oh him?" said pug. "oh take him and welcome. glad to have him off my  hands. ive never seen such a drug in the market in all my born days. priced him at  five crescents in the end and even so nobodyd have him. threw him in free with other lots  and still no one would have him. wouldnt touch him. wouldnt look at him. packs, bring out  sulky.”
thus eustace was produced, and sulky he certainly looked; for though no one  would want to be sold as a slave, it is perhaps even more galling to be a sort of  utility slave whom no one will buy. he walked up to caspian and said, "i see. as usual.  been enjoying yourself somewhere while the rest of us were prisoners. i suppose  you havent even found out about the british consul. of course not.”
that night they had a great feast in the castle of narrowhaven and then,  "tomorrow for the beginning of our real adventures!" said reepicheep when he had made his  bows to everyone and went to bed. but it could not really be tomorrow or anything  like it. for now they were preparing to leave all known lands and seas behind them and  the fullest preparations had to be made. the dawn treader was emptied and drawn on land  by eight horses over rollers and every bit of her was gone over by the most skilled  shipwrights.
then she was launched again and victualled and watered as full as she could  hold - that is to say for twenty-eight days. even this, as edmund noticed with  disappointment, only gave them a fortnights eastward sailing before they had to abandon their  quest.
while all this was being done caspian missed no chance of questioning all  the oldest sea captains whom he could find in narrowhaven to learn if they had any  knowledge or even any rumours of land further to the east. he poured out many a flagon of the  castle ale to weather-beaten men with short grey beards and clear blue eyes, and many a  tall yarn he heard in return. but those who seemed the most truthful could tell of no  lands beyond the lone islands, and many thought that if you sailed too far east you would  come into the surges of a sea without lands that swirled perpetually round the rim of the  world - "and that, i reckon, is where your majestys friends went to the bottom." the  rest had only wild stories of islands inhabited by headless men, floating islands,  waterspouts, and a fire that burned along the water. only one, to reepicheeps delight, said, "and  beyond that, aslan country. but thats beyond the end of the world and you cant get there."  but when they questioned -him he could only say that hed heard it from his father.
bern could only tell them that he had seen his six companions sail away  eastward and that nothing had, ever been heard of them again. he said this when he and  caspian were standing on the highest point of avra looking down on the eastern ocean.  "ive often been up here of a morning," said the duke, "ands seen the sun come up out of the  sea, and sometimes it looked as if it were only a couple of miles away. and ive  wondered about my friends and wondered what there really is behind that horizon. nothing,  most likely,  
yet i am always half ashamed that i stayed behind. but i wish your majesty  wouldnt go.
we may need your help here. this closing the slave market might make a new  world; war with calormen is what i foresee. my liege, think again.”
"i have an oath, my lord duke," said caspian. "and anyway, what could i say  to reepicheep?”

 



CHAPTER FIVE

www.lzuowen.com
the storm and what came of it  it was nearly three weeks after their landing that the dawn treader was  towed out of narrowhaven harbour. very solemn farewells had been spoken and a great  crowd had assembled to see her departure. there had been cheers, and tears too, when  caspian made his last speech to the lone islanders and parted from the duke and his  family, but as the ship, her purple sail still flapping idly, drew further from the shore, and  the sound of caspians trumpet from the poop came fainter across the water, everyone  became silent.
then she came into the wind. the sail swelled out, the tug cast off and  began rowing back, the first real wave ran up under the dawn treaders prow, and she was  a live ship again. the men off duty went below, drinian took the first watch on the  poop, and she turned her head eastward round the south of avra.
the next few days were delightful. lucy thought she was the most fortunate  girl in the world; as she woke each morning to see the reflections of the sunlit water  dancing on the ceiling of her cabin and looked round on all the nice new things she had  got in the lone islands - seaboots and buskins and cloaks and jerkins and scarves. and then  she would go on deck and take a look from the forecastle at a sea which was a brighter  blue each morning and drink in an air that was a little warmer day by day. after that  came breakfast and such an appetite as one only has at sea.
she spent a good deal of time sitting on the little bench in the stern  playing chess with reepicheep. it was amusing to see him lifting the pieces, which were far  too big for him, with both paws and standing on tiptoes if he made a move near the centre of  the board.
he was a good player and when he remembered what he was doing he usually  won. but every now and then lucy won because the mouse did something quite  ridiculous like sending a knight into the danger of a queen and castle combined. this  happened because he had momentarily forgotten it was a game of chess and was thinking of a  real battle and making the knight do what he would certainly have done in its place. for  his mind was full of forlorn hopes, death-or-glory charges, and last stands.
but this pleasant time did not last. there came an evening when lucy,  gazing idly astern at the long furrow or wake they were leaving behind them, saw a great rack  of clouds building itself up in the west with amazing speed.
then a gap was torn in it and a yellow sunset poured through the gap. all  the waves behind them seemed to take on unusual shapes and the sea was a drab or  yellowish colour like dirty canvas. the air grew cold. the ship seemed to move uneasily as  if she felt danger behind he the sail would be flat and limp one minute and wildly the  next. while she was noting these things and wondering at a sinister change which had  come over the very noise the wind, drinian cried, "all hands on deck." in a moment  everyone became frantically busy. the hatches wet battened down, the galley fire was put  out, men went aloft to reef the sail. before they had finished the storm struck them. it  seemed to lucy that a great valley in the sea opened just before their bows, and they  rushed down in it, deeper down than she would have believed possible. a great grey hill of  water, far higher than the mast, rushed to meet them; it looked certain death but they were  tossed to the top of it. then the ship seemed to spin round. a cataract of water poured over  the deck; the poop and forecastle were like two islands with a fierce sea between them.  aloft the sailors were lying out along the yard desperate trying to get control of the sail.  a broken rope stood out sideways in the wind as straight and stiff as if it was poker.
"get below, maam," bawled drinian. and lucy knowing that landsmen - and landswomen - are a nuisance to the crew, began to obey. it was not easy.  the dawn treader was listing terribly to starboard and the deck sloped like the roof  of a house. she had to clamber round to the top of the ladder, holding on to the rail, and  the stand by while two men climbed up it, and then get down as best she could. it was  well she was already holding tight for at the foot of the ladder another wave roar  across the deck, up to her shoulders. she was already almost wet through with spray and rain but  this was colder. then she made a dash for the cabin door and got in and shut out for  a moment the appalling sight of the speed with which they were rushing into the dark,  but not of course the horrible confusion of creakings, groanings, snappings, clatterings,  roarings and boomings which only sounded more alarming below than they had done on the  poop.
and all next day and all the next it went on. it went on till one could  hardly even remember a time before it had begun. and there always had to be three men  at the tiller and it was as much as three could do to keep any kind of a course. and  there always had to be men at the pump. and there was hardly any rest for anyone, and  nothing could be cooked and nothing could be dried, and one man was lost overboard, and they  never saw the sun.
when it was over eustace made the following entry in his diary.
"3 september. the first day for ages when i have been able to write. we had  been driven before a hurricane for thirteen days and nights. i know that because i kept  a careful count, though the others all say it was only twelve. pleasant to be embarked on a  dangerous voyage with people who cant even count right! i have had a ghastly time,  up and down enormous waves hour after hour, usually wet to the skin, and not even an  attempt at giving us proper meals. needless to say theres no wireless or even a  rocket, so no chance of signalling anyone for help. it all proves what i keep on telling them,  the madness of setting out in a rotten little tub like this. it would be bad enough even  if one was with  
decent people instead of fiends in human form. caspian and edmund are  simply brutal to me. the night we lost our mast (theres only a stump left now), though i  was not at all well, they forced me to come on deck and work like a slave. lucy shoved her  oar in by saying that reepicheep was longing to go only he was too small. i wonder  she doesnt see that everything that little beast does is all for the sake of showing off.  even at her age she ought to have that amount of sense. today the beastly boat is level at last  and the suns out and we have all been jawing about what to do. we have food enough,  pretty beastly stuff most of it, to last for sixteen days. (the poultry were all washed  overboard. even if they hadnt been, the storm would have stopped them laying.) the real  trouble is water.
two casks seem to have got a leak knocked in them and are empty. (narnian  efficiency again.) on short rations, half a pint a day each, weve got enough for  twelve days.
(theres still lots of rum and wine but even they realize that would only  make them thirstier.)
"if we could, of course, the sensible thing would be to turn west at once  and make for the lone islands. but it took us eighteen days to get where we are, running  like mad with a gale behind us. even if we got an east wind it might take us far longer to  get back. and at present theres no sign of an east wind - in fact theres no wind at all.  as for rowing back, it would take far too long and caspian says the men couldnt row on half a  pint of water a day. im pretty sure this is wrong. i tried to explain that perspiration  really cools people down, so the men would need less water if they were working. he didnt take  any notice of this, which is always his way when he cant think of an answer. the  others all voted for going on in the hope of finding land. i felt it my duty to point out  that we didnt know there was any land ahead and tried to get them to see the dangers of  wishful thinking.
instead of producing a better plan they had the cheek to ask me what i  proposed. so i just explained coolly and quietly that i had been kidnapped and brought away on  this idiotic voyage without my consent, and it was hardly my business to get them out of  their scrape.
"4 september. still becalmed. very short rations for dinner and i got less  than anyone.
caspian is very clever at helping and thinks i dont see! lucy for some  reason tried to make up to me by offering me some of hers but that interfering prig edmund  wouldnt let her. pretty hot sun. terribly thirsty all evening.
"5 september. still becalmed and very hot. feeling rotten all day and am  sure ive got a temperature. of course they havent the sense to keep a thermometer on  board.
"6 september. a horrible day. woke up in the night knowing i was feverish  and must have a drink of water. any doctor would have said so. heaven knows im the  last person to try to get any unfair advantage but i never dreamed that this water- rationing would be meant to apply to a sick man. in fact i would have woken the others up and  asked for some only i thought it would be selfish to wake them. so i got up and took  my cup and tiptoed out of the black hole we slept in, taking great care not to disturb  caspian and edmund, for theyve been sleeping badly since the heat and the short water  began. i always try to consider others whether they are nice to me or not. i got out  all right into the big room, if you can call it a room, where the rowing benches and the  luggage are. the  
thing of water is at this end. all was going beautifully, but before id  drawn a cupful who should catch me but that little spy reep. i tried to explain that i was  going on deck for a breath of air (the business about the water had nothing to do with him) and  he asked me why i had a cup. he made such a noise that the whole ship was roused. they  treated me scandalously. i asked, as i think anyone would have, why reepicheep was  sneaking about the water cask in the middle of the night. he said that as he was too small  to be any use on deck, he did sentry over the water every night so that one more man  could go to sleep.
now comes their rotten unfairness: they all believed him. can you beat it?
"i had to apologize or the dangerous little brute would have been at me  with his sword.
and then caspian showed up in his true colours as a brutal tyrant and said  out loud for everyone to hear that anyone found "stealing" water in future would "get  two dozen". i didnt know what this meant till edmund explained to me. it comes in the  sort of books those pevensie kids read.
"after this cowardly threat caspian changed his tune and started being  patronizing. said he was sorry for me and that everyone felt just as feverish as i did and we  must all make the best of it, etc., etc. odious stuck-up prig. stayed in bed all day  today.
"7 september. a little wind today but still from the west.
made a few miles eastward with part of the sail, set on what drinian calls  the jury-mast-that means the bowsprit set upright and tied (they call it "lashed") to the  stump of the real mast. still terribly thirsty.
"8 september. still sailing east. i stay in my bunk all day now and see no  one except lucy till the two fiends come to bed. lucy gives me a little of her water  ration. she says girls dont get as thirsty as boys. i had often thought this but it ought  to be more generally known at sea.
"9 september. land in sight; a very high mountain a long way off to the  south-east.
"10 september. the mountain is bigger and clearer but still a long way off.  gulls again today for the first time since i dont know how long.
"11 september. caught some fish and had them for dinner. dropped anchor at  about 7 p.m. in three fathoms of water in a bay of this mountainous island. that  idiot caspian wouldnt let us go ashore because it was getting dark and he was afraid of  savages and wild beasts. extra water ration tonight.”
what awaited them on this island was going to concern eustace more than  anyone else, but it cannot be told in his words because after september 11 he forgot  about keeping his diary for a long time.
when morning came, with a low, grey sky but very hot, the adventurers found  they were in a bay encircled by such cliffs and crags that it was like a norwegian  fjord. in front of  
them, at the head of the bay, there was some level land heavily overgrown  with trees that appeared to be cedars, through which a rapid stream came out. beyond that  was a steep ascent ending in a jagged ridge and behind that a vague darkness of  mountains which ran into dull-coloured clouds so that you could not see their tops. the nearer  cliffs, at each side of the bay, were streaked here and there with lines of white which  everyone knew to be waterfalls, though at that distance they did not show any movement or  make any noise. indeed the whole place was very silent and the water of the bay as  smooth as glass.
it reflected every detail of the cliffs. the scene would have been pretty  in a picture but was rather oppressive in real life. it was not a country that welcomed  visitors.
the whole ships company went ashore in two boatloads and everyone drank  and washed deliciously in the river and had a meal and a rest before caspian sent four  men back to keep the ship, and the days work began. there was everything to be done.  the casks must be brought ashore and the faulty ones mended if possible and all  refilled; a tree - a pine if they could get it - must be felled and made into a new mast; sails  must be repaired; a hunting party organized to shoot any game the land might yield; clothes  to be washed and mended; and countless small breakages on board to be set right. for the  dawn treader herself - and this was more obvious now that they saw her at a  distance - could hardly be recognized as the same gallant ship which had left narrowhaven.  she looked a crippled, discoloured hulk which anyone might have taken for a wreck. and  her officers and crew were no better - lean, pale, red-eyed from lack of sleep, and  dressed in rags.
as eustace lay under a tree and heard all these plans being discussed his  heart sank. was there going to be no rest? it looked as if their first day on the longed- for land was going to be quite as hard work as a day at sea. then a delightful idea occurred  to him. nobody was looking they were all chattering about their ship as if they actually  liked the beastly thing. why shouldnt he simply slip away? he would take a stroll inland,  find a cool, airy place up in the mountains, have a good long sleep, and not rejoin the  others till the days work was over. he felt it would do him good. but he would take great care  to keep the bay and the ship in sight so as to be sure of his way back. he wouldnt  like to be left behind in this country.
he at once put his plan into action. he rose quietly from his place and  walked away among the trees, taking care to go slowly and in an aimless manner so that  anyone who saw him would think he was merely stretching his legs. he was surprised to  find how quickly the noise of conversation died away behind hiin and how very silent  and warm and dark green the wood became. soon he felt he could venture on a quicker  and more determined stride.
this soon brought him out of the wood. the ground began sloping steeply up  in front of him. the grass was dry and slippery but manageable if he used his hands as  well as his feet, and though he panted and mopped his forehead a good deal, he plugged  away steadily. this showed, by the way, that his new life, little as he  suspected it, had already done him some good; the old eustace, harold and albertas eustace, would  have given up the climb after about ten minutes.
slowly, and with several rests, he reached the ridge. here he had expected  to have a view into the heart of the island, but the clouds had now come lower and nearer  and a sea of fog was rolling to meet him. he sat down and looked back. he was now so  high that the bay looked small beneath him and miles of sea were visible. then the fog  from the mountains closed in all round him, thick but not cold, and he lay down and  turned this way and that to find the most comfortable position to enjoy himself.
but he didnt enjoy himself, or not for very long. he began, almost for the  first time in his life, to feel lonely. at first this feeling grew very gradually. and then  he began to worry about the time. there was not the slightest sound. suddenly it occurred to  him that he might have been lying there for hours. perhaps the others had gone! perhaps  they had let him wander away on purpose simply in order to leave him behind! he leaped  up in a panic and began the descent.
at first he tried to do it too quickly, slipped on the steep grass, and  slid for several feet.
then he thought this had carried him too far to the left - and as he came  up he had seen precipices on that side. so he clambered up again, as near as he could  guess to the place he had started from, and began the descent afresh, bearing to his right.  after that things seemed to be going better. he went very cautiously, for he could not see  more than a yard ahead, and there was still perfect silence all around him. it is very  unpleasant to have to go cautiously when there is a voice inside you saying all the time, "hurry,  hurry, hurry.”
for every moment the terrible idea of being left behind grew stronger. if  he had understood caspian and the pevensies at all he would have known, of course,  that there was not the least chance of their doing any such thing. but he had  persuaded himself that they were all fiends in human form.
"at last!" said eustace as he came slithering down a slide of loose stones  (scree, they call it) and found himself on the level. "and now, where are those trees? there  is something dark ahead. why, i do believe the fog is clearing.”
it was. the light increased every moment and made him blink. the fog  lifted. he was in an utterly unknown valley and the sea was nowhere in sight.

 



CHAPTER SIX

　小./说。txt天堂
the adventures of eustace  at that very moment the others were washing hands and faces in the river  and generally getting ready for dinner and a rest. the three best archers had gone up  into the hills north of the bay and returned laden with a pair of wild goats which were now  roasting over a fire. caspian had ordered a cask of wine ashore, strong wine of archenland  which had to be mixed with water before you drank it, so there would be plenty for all.  the work had  
gone well so far and it was a merry meal. only after the second helping of  goat did edmund say, "wheres that blighter eustace?”
meanwhile eustace stared round the unknown valley. it was so narrow and  deep, and the precipices which surrounded it so sheer, that it was like a huge pit or  trench. the floor was grassy though strewn with rocks, and here and there eustace saw black  burnt patches like those you see on the sides of a railway embankment in a dry summer.
about fifteen yards away from him was a pool of clear, smooth water. there  was, at first, nothing else at all in the valley; not an animal, not a bird, not an  insect. the sun beat down and grim peaks and horns of mountains peered over the valleys edge.
eustace realized of course that in the fog he had come down the wrong side  of the ridge, so he turned at once to see about getting back. but as soon as he had  looked he shuddered. apparently he had by amazing luck found the only possible way  down - a long green spit of land, horribly steep and narrow, with precipices on  either side. there was no other possible way of getting back. but could he do it, now that he  saw what it was really like? his head swam at the very thought of it.
he turned round again, thinking that at any rate hed better have a good  drink from the pool first. but as soon as he had turned and before he had taken a step  forward into the valley he heard a noise behind him. it was only a small noise but it  sounded loud in that immense silence. it froze him dead-still where he stood for a second. then  he slewed round his neck and looked.
at the bottom of the cliff a little on his left hand was a low, dark hole -  the entrance to a cave perhaps. and out of this two thin wisps of smoke were coming. and the  loose stones just beneath the dark hollow were moving (that was the noise he had heard)  just as if something were crawling in the dark behind them.
something was crawling. worse still, something was coming out. edmund or  lucy or you would have recognized it at once, but eustace had read none of the  right books. the thing that came out of the cave was something he had never even imagined -  along lead-coloured snout, dull red eyes, no feathers or fur, a long lithe body that  trailed on the ground, legs whose elbows went up higher than its back like a spiders  cruel claws, bats wings that made a rasping noise on the stones, yards of tail. and the lines  of smoke were coming from its two nostrils. he never said the word dragon to himself. nor  would it have made things any better if he had.
but perhaps if he had known something about dragons he would have been a  little surprised at this dragons behaviour. it did not sit up and clap its wings,  nor did it shoot out a stream of flame from its mouth. the smoke from its nostrils was like  the smoke of a fire that will not last much longer. nor did it seem to have noticed  eustace. it moved very slowly towards the pool - slowly and with many pauses. even in his fear  eustace felt that it was an old, sad creature. he wondered if he dared make a dash for the  ascent. but it might look round if he made any noise. it might come more to life. perhaps  it was only  
shamming. anyway, what was the use of trying to escape by climbing from a  creature that could fly?
it reached the pool and slid its horrible scaly chin down over the gravel  to drink: but before it had drunk there came from it a great croaking or clanging cry and  after a few twitches and convulsions it rolled round on its side and lay perfectly  still with one claw in the air. a little dark blood gushed from its wide-opened mouth. the smoke  from its nostrils turned black for a moment and then floated away. no more came.  this was the brutes trick, the way it lured travellers to their doom. but one couldnt  wait for ever. he took a step nearer, then two steps, and halted again. the dragon remained  motionless; he noticed too that the red fire had gone out of its eyes. at last he came up  to it. he was quite sure now that it was dead. with a shudder he touched it; nothing  happened.
the relief was so great that eustace almost laughed out loud. he began to  feel as if he had fought and killed the dragon instead of merely seeing it die. he  stepped over it and went to the pool for his drink, for the heat was getting unbearable. he was  not surprised when he heard a peal of thunder. almost immediately afterwards the sun  disappeared and before he had finished his drink big drops of rain were falling.
the climate of this island was a very unpleasant one. in less than a minute  eustace was wet to the skin and half blinded with such rain as one never sees in  europe. there was no use trying to climb out of the valley as long as this lasted. he bolted for  the only shelter in sight - the dragons cave. there he lay down and tried to get his  breath.
most of us know what we should expect to find in a dragons lair, but, as i  said before, eustace had read only the wrong books. they had a lot to say about exports  and imports and governments and drains, but they were weak on dragons. that is why he  was so puzzled at the surface on which he was lying. parts of it were too prickly  to be stones and too hard to be thorns, and there seemed to be a great many round, flat  things, and it all clinked when he moved. there was light enough at the caves mouth to  examine it by.
and of course eustace found it to be what any of us could have told him in  advance - treasure. there were crowns (those were the prickly things), coins, rings,  bracelets, ingots, cups, plates and gems.
eustace (unlike most boys) had never thought much of treasure but he saw at  once the use it would be in this new world which he had so foolishly stumbled into  through the picture in lucys bedroom at home. "they dont have any tax here," he said, "and  you dont have to give treasure to the government. with some of this stuff i could have  quite a decent time here - perhaps in calormen. it sounds the least phoney of these  countries. i wonder how much i can carry? that bracelet now - those things in it are probably  diamonds - ill slip that on my own wrist. too big, but not if i push it right up here  above my elbow.
then fill my pockets with diamonds - thats easier than gold. i wonder when  this infernal rains going to let up?" he got into a less uncomfortable part of the pile,  where it was mostly coins, and settled down to wait. but a bad fright, when once it is  over, and especially a bad fright following a mountain walk, leaves you very tired.  eustace fell asleep.
by the time he was sound asleep and snoring the others had finished dinner  and became seriously alarmed about him. they shouted, "eustace! eustace! coo-ee!" till  they were hoarse and caspian blew his horn.
"hes nowhere near or hed have heard that," said lucy with a white face.
"confound the fellow," said edmund. "what on earth did he want to slink  away like this for?”
"but we must do something," said lucy. "he may have got lost, or fallen  into a hole, or been captured by savages.”
"or killed by wild beasts," said drinian.
"and a good riddance if he has, i say," muttered rhince.
"master rhince," said reepicheep, "you never spoke a word that became you  less. the creature is no friend of mine but he is of the queens blood, and while he  is one of our fellowship it concerns our honour to find him and to avenge him if he is  dead.”
"of course weve got to find him (if we can)," said caspian wearily.  "thats the nuisance of it. it means a search party and endless trouble. bother eustace.”
meanwhile eustace slept and slept - and slept. what woke him was a pain in  his arm. the moon was shining in at the mouth of the cave, and the bed of treasures  seemed to have grown much more comfortable: in fact he could hardly feel it at all. he was  puzzled by the pain in his arm at first, but presently it occurred to him that the  bracelet which he had shoved up above his elbow had become strangely tight. his arm must have  swollen while he was asleep (it was his left arm).
he moved his right arm in order to feel his left, but stopped before he had  moved it an inch and bit his lip in terror. for just in front of him, and a little on  his right, where the moonlight fell clear on the floor of the cave, he saw a hideous shape  moving. he knew that shape: it was a dragons claw. it had moved as he moved his hand and  became still when he stopped moving his hand.
"oh, what a fool ive been," thought eustace. "of course, the brute had a  mate and its lying beside me.”
for several minutes he did not dare to move a muscle. he saw two thin  columns of smoke going up before his eyes, black against the moonlight; just as there had  been smoke coming from the other dragons nose before it died. this was so alarming  that he held his breath. the two columns of smoke vanished. when he could hold his breath no  longer he let it out stealthily; instantly two jets of smoke appeared again. but even  yet he had no idea of the truth.
presently he decided that he would edge very cautiously to his left and try  to creep out of the cave. perhaps the creature was asleep - and anyway it was his only  chance. but of course before he edged to the left he looked to the left. oh horror! there  was a dragons claw on that side too.
no one will blame eustace if at this moment he shed tears. he was surprised  at the size of his own tears as he saw them splashing on to the treasure in front of him.  they also seemed strangely hot; steam went up from them.
but there was no good crying. he must try to crawl out from between the two  dragons.
he began extending his right arm. the dragons fore-leg and claw on his  right went through exactly the same motion. then he thought he would try his left. the  dragon limb on that side moved too.
two dragons, one on each side, mimicking whatever he did! his nerve broke  and he simply made a bolt for it.
there was such a clatter and rasping, and clinking of gold, and grinding of  stones, as he rushed out of the cave that he thought they were both following him. he  darent look back. he rushed to the pool. the twisted shape of the dead dragon lying in  the moonlight would have been enough to frighten anyone but now he hardly noticed it. his  idea was to get into the water.
but just as he reached the edge of the pool two things happened. first of  all it came over him like a thunder-clap that he had been running on all fours - and why on  earth had he been doing that? and secondly, as he bent towards the water, he thought for  a second that yet another dragon was staring up at him out of the pool. but in an instant  he realized the truth. the dragon face in the pool was his own reflection. there was no  doubt of it. it moved as he moved: it opened and shut its mouth as he opened and shut his.
he had turned into a dragon while he was asleep. sleeping on a dragons  hoard with greedy, dragonish thoughts in his heart, he had become a dragon himself.
that explained everything. there had been no two dragons beside him in the  cave. the claws to right and left had been his own right and left claw. the two  columns of smoke had been coming from his own nostrils. as for the pain in his left arm (or  what had been his left arm) he could now see what had happened by squinting with his left  eye. the bracelet which had fitted very nicely on the upper arm of a boy was far too  small for the thick, stumpy foreleg of a dragon. it had sunk deeply into his scaly flesh  and there was a throbbing bulge on each side of it. he tore at the place with his dragons  teeth but could not get it off.
in spite of the pain, his first feeling was one of relief. there was  nothing to be afraid of any more. he was a terror himself and nothing in the world but a knight  (and not all of those) would dare to attack him. he could get even with caspian and edmund  now but  
the moment he thought this he realized that he didnt want to. he wanted to  be friends. he wanted to get back among humans and talk and laugh and share things. he  realized that he was a monster cut off from the whole human race. an appalling loneliness  came over him. he began to see that the others had not really been fiends at all. he  began to wonder if he himself had been such a nice person as he had always supposed. he  longed for their voices. he would have been grateful for a kind word even from reepicheep.
when he thought of this the poor dragon that had been eustace lifted up its  voice and wept. a powerful dragon crying its eyes out under the moon in a deserted  valley is a sight and a sound hardly to be imagined.
at last he decided he would try to find his way back to the shore. he  realized now that caspian would never have sailed away and left him. and he felt sure that  somehow or other he would be able to make people understand who he was.
he took a long drink and then (i know this sounds shocking, but it isnt if  you think it over) he ate nearly all the dead dragon. he was half-way through it before  he realized what he was doing; for, you see, though his mind was the mind of eustace,  his tastes and his digestion were dragonish. and there is nothing a dragon likes so well  as fresh dragon.
that is why you so seldom find more than one dragon in the same county.
then he turned to climb out of the valley. he began the climb with a jump  and as soon as he jumped he found that he was flying. he had quite forgotten about his  wings and it was a great surprise to him - the first pleasant surprise he had had for a long  time. he rose high into the air and saw innumerable mountain-tops spread out beneath him  in the moonlight. he could see the bay like a silver slab and the dawn treader  lying at anchor and camp fires twinkling in the woods beside the beach. from a great height  he launched himself down towards them in a single glide.
lucy was sleeping very soundly for she had sat up till the return of the  search party in hope of good news about eustace. it had been led by caspian and had come  back late and weary. their news was disquieting. they had found no trace of eustace but  had seen a dead dragon in a valley. they tried to make the best of it and everyone  assured everyone else that there were not likely to he more dragons about, and that one  which was dead at about three oclock that afternoon (which was when they had seen it) would  hardly have been killing people a very few hours before.
"unless it ate the little brat and died of him: hed poison anything," said  rhince. but he said this under his breath and no one heard it.
but later in the night lucy was wakened, very softly, and found the whole  company gathered close together and talking in whispers.
"what is it?" said lucy.
"we must all show great constancy," caspian was saying. "a dragon has just  flown over the tree-tops and lighted on the beach. yes, i am afraid it is between us  and the ship. and arrows are no use against dragons. and theyre not at all afraid of fire.”
"with your majestys leave-" began reepicheep.
"no, reepicheep," said the king very firmly, "you are not to attempt a  single combat with it. and unless you promise to obey me in this matter ill have you  tied up. we must just keep close watch and, as soon as it is light, go down to the beach and  give it battle. i will lead. king edmund will be on my right and the lord drinian on my left.  there are no other arrangements to be made. it will be light in a couple of hours. in  an hours time let a meal be served out and what is left of the wine. and let everything  be done silently.”
"perhaps it will go away," said lucy.
"itll be worse if it does," said edmund, "because then we shant know  where it is. if theres a wasp in the room i like to be able to see it.”
the rest of the night wa dreadful, and when the meal came, though they knew  they ought to eat, many found that they had very poor appetites. and endless hours  seemed to pass before the darkness thinned and birds began chirping here and there and the  world got colder and wetter than it had been all night and caspian said, "now for it,  friends.”
they got up, all with swords drawn, and formed themselves into a solid mass  with lucy in the middle and reepicheep on her shoulder. it was nicer than the waiting  about and everyone felt fonder of everyone else than at ordinary times. a moment  later they were marching. it grew lighter as they came to the edge of the wood. and there  on the sand, like a giant lizard, or a flexible crocodile, or a serpent with legs, huge  and horrible and humpy, lay the dragon.
but when it saw them, instead of rising up and blowing fire and smoke, the  dragon retreated - you could almost say it waddled - back into the shallows of the  bay.
"whats it wagging its head like that for?" said edmund.
"and now its nodding," said caspian.
"and theres something coming from its eyes," said drinian.
"oh, cant you see," said lucy. "its crying. those are tears.”
"i shouldnt trust to that, maam," said drinian. "thats what crocodiles  do, to put you off your guard.”
"it wagged its head when you said that," remarked edmund. "just as if it  meant no.
look, there it goes again.”
"do you think it understands what were saying?" asked lucy.
the dragon nodded its head violently.
reepicheep slipped off lucys shoulder and stepped to the front.
"dragon," came his shrill voice, "can you understand speech?”
the dragon nodded.
"can you speak?”
it shook its head.
"then," said reepicheep, "it is idle to ask you your business. but if you  will swear friendship with us raise your left foreleg above your head.”
it did so, but clumsily because that leg was sore and swollen with the  golden bracelet  "oh look," said lucy, "theres something wrong with its leg. the poor thing  - thats probably what it was crying about. perhaps it came to us to be cured like  in androcles and the lion.”
"be careful, lucy," said caspian. "its a very clever dragon but it may be  a liar.”
lucy had, however, already run forward, followed by reepicheep, as fast as  his short legs could carry him, and then of course the boys and drinian came, too.
"show me your poor paw," said lucy, "i might be able to cure it.”
the dragon-that-had-been-eustace held out its sore leg gladly enough,  remembering how lucys cordial had cured him of sea-sickness before he became a dragon. but  he was disappointed. the magic fluid reduced the swelling and eased the pain a  little but it could not dissolve the gold.
everyone had now crowded round to watch the treatment, and caspian suddenly exclaimed, "look!" he was staring at the bracelet.





CHAPTER SEVEN

小＜说＜t＜xt＞天？堂
how the adventure ended   
"look at what?" said edmund.
"look at the device on the gold," said caspian.
"a little hammer with a diamond above it like a star," said drinian. "why,  ive seen that before.”
"seen it!" said caspian. "why, of course you have. it is the sign of a  great narnian house.
this is the lord octesians arm-ring.”
"villain," said reepicheep to the dragon, "have you devoured a narnian  lord?" but the dragon shook his head violently.
"or perhaps," said lucy, "this is the lord octesian, turned into a dragon -  under an enchantment, you know.”
"it neednt be either," said edmund. "all dragons collect gold. but i think  its a safe guess that octesian got no further than this island.”
"are you the lord octesian?" said lucy to the dragon, and then, when it  sadly shook its head, "are you someone enchanted - someone human, i mean?”
it nodded violently.
and then someone said - people disputed afterwards whether lucy or edmund  said it first - "youre not - not eustace by any chance?”
and eustace nodded his terrible dragon head and thumped his tail in the sea  and everyone skipped back (some of the sailors with ejaculations i will not put  down in writing) to avoid the enormous and boiling tears which flowed from his  eyes.
lucy tried hard to console him and even screwed up her courage to kiss the  scaly face, and nearly everyone said "hard luck" and several assured eustace that they  would all stand by him and many said there was sure to be some way of disenchanting  him and theyd have him as right as rain in a day or two. and of course they were  all very anxious to hear his story, but he couldnt speak. more than once in the days that  followed he attempted to write it for them on the sand. but, this never succeeded. in  the first place eustace (never having read the right books) had no idea how to tell a story  straight. and for another thing, the muscles and nerves of the dragon-claws that he had  to use had never learned to write and were not built for writing anyway. as a result  he never got nearly to the end before the tide came in and washed away all the writing  except the bits he had already trodden on or accidentaly swished out with his tail. and all  that anyone had seen would be something like this - the dots are for the bits he had  smudged  out i wnet to sl ee . . . rgos agrons i mean drangons   
cave cause it-was dead and awing so har . . . woke up and cou . . .
get offf mi arm oh bother . . .
it was, however, clear to everyone that eustaces character had been rather  improved by becoming a dragon. he was anxious to help. he flew over the whole island  and found it was all mountainous and inhabited only by wild goats and droves of wild  swine. of these he brought back many carcasses as provisions for the ship. he was a very  humane killer too, for he could dispatch a beast with one blow of his tail so that it  didnt know (and presumably still doesnt know) it had been killed. he ate a few himself, of  course, but always alone, for now that he was a dragon he liked his food raw but he  could never bear to let others see him at his messy meals. and one day, flying slowly and  wearily but in great triumph, he bore back to camp a great tall pine tree which he had  torn up by the roots in a distant valley and which could be made into a capital mast. and  in the evening if it turned chilly, as it sometimes did after the heavy rains, he was a  comfort to everyone, for the whole party would come and sit with their backs against his hot  sides and get well warmed and dried; and one puff of his fiery breath would light the most  obstinate fire.
sometimes he would take a select party for a fly on his back, so that they  could see wheeling below them the green slopes, the rocky heights, the narrow pit- like valleys and far out over the sea to the eastward a spot of darker blue on the blue  horizon which might be land.
the pleasure (quite new to him) of being liked and, still more, of liking  other people, was what kept eustace from despair. for it was very dreary being a dragon. he  shuddered whenever he caught sight of his own reflection as he flew over a mountain  lake. he hated the huge batlike wings, the saw-edged ridge on his back, and the cruel,  curved claws. he was almost afraid to be alone with himself and yet he was ashamed to be  with the others.
on the evenings when he was not being used as a hot-water bottle he would  slink away from the camp and lie curled up like a snake between the wood and the  water. on such occasions, greatly to his surprise, reepicheep was his most constant  comforter. the noble mouse would creep away from the merry circle at the camp fire and sit down  by the dragons head, well to the windward to be out of the way of his smoky  breath. there he would explain that what had happened to eustace was a striking illustration  of the turn of fortunes wheel, and that if he had eustace at his own house in narnia (it  was really a hole not a house and the dragons head, let alone his body, would not have  fitted in) he could show him more than a hundred examples of emperors, kings, dukes,  knights, poets, lovers, astronomers, philosophers, and magicians, who had fallen from  prosperity into the most distressing circumstances, and of whom many had recovered and lived  happily ever afterwards. it did not, perhaps, seem so very comforting at the time, but  it was kindly meant and eustace never forgot it.
but of course what hung over everyone like a cloud was the problem of what  to do with their dragon when they were ready to sail. they tried not to talk of it  when he was there, but he couldnt help overhearing things like, "would he fit all along one  side of the deck?
and wed have to shift all the stores to the other side down below so as to  balance," or, "would towing him be any good?" or "would he be able to keep up by flying?"  and (most often of all), "but how are we to feed him?" and poor eustace  realized more and  
more that since the first day he came on board he had been an unmitigated  nuisance and that he was now a greater nuisance still. and this ate into his mind, just  as that bracelet ate into his foreleg. he knew that it only made it worse to tear at it with  his great teeth, but he couldnt help tearing now and then, especially on hot nights.
about six days after they had landed on dragon island, edmund happened to  wake up very early one morning. it was just getting grey so that you could see the  tree-trunks if they were between you and the bay but not in the other direction. as he  woke he thought he heard something moving, so he raised himself on one elbow and looked  about him: and presently he thought he saw a dark figure moving on the seaward side of  the wood.
the idea that at once occurred to his mind was, "are we so sure there are  no natives on this island after all?" then he thought it was caspian - it was about the  right size - but he knew that caspian had been sleeping next to him and could see that he  hadnt moved.
edmund made sure that his sword was in its place and then rose to  investigate.
he came down softly to the edge of the wood and the dark figure was still  there. he saw now that it was too small for caspian and too big for lucy. it did not run  away. edmund drew his sword and was about to challenge the stranger when the stranger  said in a low voice, "is that you, edmund?”
"yes. who are you?" said he.
"dont you know me?" said the other. "its me eustace.”
"by jove," said edmund, "so it is. my dear chap -”
"hush," said eustace and lurched as if he were going to fall.
"hello!" said edmund, steadying him. "whats up? are you ill?”
eustace was silent for so long that edmund thought he was fainting; but at  last he said, "its been ghastly. you dont know . . . but its all right now. could we  go and talk somewhere? i dont want to meet the others just yet.”
"yes, rather, anywhere you like," said edmund. "we can go and sit on the  rocks over there. i say, i am glad to see you - er - looking yourself again. you must  have had a pretty beastly time.”
they went to the rocks and sat down looking out across the bay while the  sky got paler and paler and the stars disappeared except for one very bright one low down  and near the horizon.
"i wont tell you how i became a - a dragon till i can tell the others and  get it all over,”
said eustace. "by the way, i didnt even know it was a dragon till i heard  you all using the word when i turned up here the other morning. i want to tell you how i  stopped being one.”
"fire ahead," said edmund.
"well, last night i was more miserable than ever. and that beastly arm-ring  was hurting like anything-”
"is that all right now?”
eustace laughed - a different laugh from any edmund had heard him give  before - and slipped the bracelet easily off his arm. "there it is," he said, "and  anyone who likes can have it as far as im concerned. well, as i say, i was lying awake and  wondering what on earth would become of me. and then - but, mind you, it may have been all a  dream. i dont know.”
"go on," said edmund, with considerable patience.
"well, anyway, i looked up and saw the very last thing i expected: a huge  lion coming slowly towards me. and one queer thing was that there was no moon last  night, but there was moonlight where the lion was. so it came nearer and nearer. i was  terribly afraid of it. you may think that, being a dragon, i could have knocked any lion out  easily enough.
but it wasnt that kind of fear. i wasnt afraid of it eating me, i was  just afraid of it - if you can understand. well, it came close up to me and looked straight into my  eyes. and i shut my eyes tight. but that wasnt any good because it told me to follow it.”
"you mean it spoke?”
"i dont know. now that you mention it, i dont think it did. but it told  me all the same.
and i knew id have to do what it told me, so i got up and followed it. and  it led me a long way into the mountains. and there was always this moonlight over and  round the lion wherever we went. so at last we came to the top of a mountain id  never seen before and on the top of this mountain there was a garden - trees and fruit and  everything. in the middle of it there was a well.
"i knew it was a well because you could see the water bubbling up from the  bottom of it: but it was a lot bigger than most wells - like a very big, round bath with  marble steps going down into it. the water was as clear as anything and i thought if i  could get in there and bathe it would ease the pain in my leg. but the lion told me i  must undress first.
mind you, i dont know if he said any words out loud or not.
"i was just going to say that i couldnt undress because i hadnt any  clothes on when i suddenly thought that dragons are snaky sort of things and snakes can cast  their skins.
oh, of course, thought i, thats what the lion means. so i started  scratching myself and my scales began coming off all over the place. and then i scratched a  little deeper and, instead of just scales coming off here and there, my whole skin started  peeling off beautifully, like it does after an illness, or as if i was a banana. in a  minute or two i just  
stepped out of it. i could see it lying there beside me, looking rather  nasty. it was a most lovely feeling. so i started to go down into the well for my bathe.
"but just as i was going to put my feet into the water i looked down and  saw that they were all hard and rough and wrinkled and scaly just as they had been  before. oh, thats all right, said i, it only means i had another smaller suit on underneath the  first one, and ill have to get out of it too. so 1 scratched and tore again and this underskin  peeled off beautifully and out i stepped and left it lying beside the other one and  went down to the well for my bathe.
"well, exactly the same thing happened again. and i thought to myself, oh  dear, how ever many skins have i got to take off? for i was longing to bathe my leg.  so i scratched away for the third time and got off a third skin, just like the two others,  and stepped out of it. but as soon as i looked at myself in the water i knew it had been no  good.
"then the lion said - but i dont know if it spoke - "you will have to let  me undress you.”
i was afraid of his claws, i can tell you, but i was pretty nearly  desperate now. so i just lay flat down on my back to let him do it.
"the very first tear he made was so deep that i thought it had gone right  into my heart.
and when he began pulling the skin off, it hurt worse than anything ive  ever felt. the only thing that made me able to bear it was just the pleasure of feeling  the stuff peel off.
you know - if youve ever picked the scab off a sore place. it hurts like  billy-oh but it is such fun to see it coming away.”
"i know exactly what you mean," said edmund.
"well, he peeled the beastly stuff right off - just as i thought id done  it myself the other three times, only they hadnt hurt - and there it was lying on the grass:  only ever so much thicker, and darker, and more knobbly-looking than the others had been. and  there was i as smooth and soft as a peeled switch and smaller than i had been. then he  caught hold of me - i didnt like that much for i was very tender underneath now that  id no skin on - and threw me into the water. it smarted like anything but only for a  moment. after that it became perfectly delicious and as soon as i started swimming and splashing  i found that all the pain had gone from my arm. and then i saw why. id turned into a  boy again.
youd think me simply phoney if i told you how i felt about my own arms. i  know theyve no muscle and are pretty mouldy compared with caspians, but i was  so glad to see them.
"after a bit the lion took me out and dressed me -”
"dressed you. with his paws?”
"well, i dont exactly remember that bit. but he did somehow or other: in  new clothes - the same ive got on now, as a matter of fact. and then suddenly i was back  here. which is what makes me think it must have been a dream.”
"no. it wasnt a dream," said edmund.
"why not?”
"well, there are the clothes, for one thing. and you have been - well, un- dragoned, for another.”
"what do you think it was, then?" asked eustace.
"i think youve seen aslan," said edmund.
"aslan!" said eustace. "ive heard that name mentioned several times since  we joined the dawn treader. and i felt - i dont know what - i hated it. but i was hating  everything then. and by the way, id like to apologize. im afraid ive been pretty  beastly.”
"thats all right," said edmund. "between ourselves, you havent been as  bad as i was on my first trip to narnia. you were only an ass, but i was a traitor.”
"well, dont tell me about it, then," said eustace. "but who is aslan? do  you know him?”
"well - he knows me," said edmund. "he is the great lion, the son of the  emperor-beyond-the-sea, who saved me and saved narnia. weve all seen him. lucy  sees him most often. and it may be aslans country we are sailing to.”
neither said anything for a while. the last bright star had vanished and  though they could not see the sunrise because of the mountains on their right, they knew it  was going on because the sky above them and the bay before them turned the colour of  roses. then some bird of the parrot kind screamed in the wood behind them, they heard  movements among the trees, and finally a blast on caspians horn. the camp was astir.
great was the rejoicing when edmund and the restored eustace walked into  the breakfast circle round the camp fire. and now of course everyone heard the earlier  part of his story.
people wondered whether the other dragon had killed the lord octesian  several years ago or whether octesian himself had been the old dragon. the jewels with which  eustace had crammed his pockets in the cave had disappeared along with the clothes he  had then been wearing: but no one, least of all eustace himself, felt any desire to go  back to that valley for more treasure.
in a few days now the dawn treader, remasted, re-painted, and well stored,  was ready to sail. before they embarked caspian caused to be cut on a smooth cliff  facing the bay the words:  two narrow escapes   
dragon island discovered by caspian x, king of narnia, etc. in the fourth year of his reign. here, as we suppose, the lord octesian had his death  it would be nice, and fairly true, to say that "from that time forth  eustace was a different boy". to be strictly accurate, he began to be a different boy. he had  relapses. there were still many days when he could be very tiresome. but most of those i shall  not notice. the cure had begun.
the lord octesians arm ring had a curious fate. eustace did not want it  and offered it to caspian and caspian offered it to lucy. she did not care about having it.  "very well, then, catch as catch can," said caspian and flung it up in the air. this  was when they were all standing looking at the inscription. up went the ring, flashing in the  sunlight, and caught, and hung, as neatly as a well-thrown quoit, on a little projection  on the rock. no one could climb up to get it from below and no one could climb down to get  it from above. and there, for all i know, it is hanging still and may hang till  that world ends.

 



CHAPTER EIGHT

　ｗｗｗ．lzuo wen．ｃｏｍ
two narrow escapes  everyone was cheerful as the dawn treader sailed from dragon island. they  had fair winds as soon as they were out of the bay and came early next morning to  the unknown land which some of them had seen when flying over the mountains while  eustace was still a dragon. it was a low green island inhabited by nothing but rabbits  and a few goats, but from the ruins of stone huts, and from blackened places where fires had  been, they judged that it had been peopled not long before. there were also some bones  and broken weapons.
"pirates work," said caspian.
"or the dragons," said edmund.
the only other thing they found there was a little skin boat, or coracle,  on the sands. it was made of hide stretched over a wicker framework. it was a tiny boat,  barely four feet long, and the paddle which still lay in it was in proportion. they thought  that either it had been made for a child or else that the people of that country had been  dwarfs.
reepicheep decided to keep it, as it was just the right size for him; so it  was taken on board. they called that land burnt island, and sailed away before noon.
for some five days they ran before a south-south-east wind, out of sight of  all lands and seeing neither fish nor gull. then they had a day when it rained hard till  the afternoon.
eustace lost two games of chess to reepicheep and began to get like his old  and  
disagreeable self again, and edmund said he wished they could have gone to  america with susan. then lucy looked out of the stern windows and said:  "hello! i do believe its stopping. and whats that?”
they all tumbled up to the poop at this and found that the rain had stopped  and that drinian, who was on watch, was also staring hard at something astern. or  rather, at several things. they looked a little like smooth rounded rocks, a whole  line of them with intervals of about forty feet in between.
"but they cant be rocks," drinian was saying, "because they werent there  five minutes ago.”
"and ones just disappeared," said lucy.
"yes, and theres another one coming up," said edmund.
"and nearer," said eustace.
"hang it!" said caspian. "the whole thing is moving this way.”
"and moving a great deal quicker than we can sail, sire," said drinian.  "itll be up with us in a minute.”
they all held their breath, for it is not at all nice to be pursued by an  unknown something either on land or sea. but what it turned out to be was far worse than  anyone had suspected. suddenly, only about the length of a cricket pitch from their  port side, an appalling head reared itself out of the sea. it was all greens and  vermilions with purple blotches - except where shell fish clung to it - and shaped rather like a  horses, though without ears. it had enormous eyes, eyes made for staring through the dark  depths of the ocean, and a gaping mouth filled with double rows of sharp fish-like teeth.  it came up on what they first took to be a huge neck, but as more and more of it emerged  everyone knew that this was not its neck but its body and that at last they were  seeing what so many people have foolishly wanted to see - the great sea serpent. the folds  of its gigantic tail could be seen far away, rising at intervals from the surface.  and now its head was towering up higher than the mast.
every man rushed to his weapon, but there was nothing to be done, the  monster was out of reach. "shoot! shoot!" cried the master bowman, and several obeyed, but  the arrows glanced off the sea serpents hide as if it was ironplated. then, for a  dreadful minute, everyone was still, staring up at its eyes and mouth and wondering where it  would pounce.
but it didnt pounce. it shot its head forward across the ship on a level  with the yard of the mast. now its head was just beside the fighting top. still it stretched  and stretched till its head was over the starboard bulwark. then down it began to come - not  on to the  
crowded deck but into the water, so that the whole ship was under an arch  of serpent.
and almost at once that arch began to get smaller: indeed on the starboard  the sea serpent was now almost touching the dawn treaders side.
eustace (who had really been trying very hard to behave well, till the rain  and the chess put him back) now did the first brave thing he had ever done. he was  wearing a sword that caspian had lent him. as soon as the serpents body was near enough on  the starboard side he jumped on to the bulwark and began hacking at it with all  his might. it is true that he accomplished nothing beyond breaking caspians second-best  sword into bits, but it was a fine thing for a beginner to have done.
others would have joined him if at that moment reepicheep had not called  out, "dont fight! push!" it was so unusual for the mouse to advise anyone not to fight  that, even in that terrible moment, every eye turned to him. and when he jumped up on to  the bulwark, forward of the snake, and set his little furry back against its  huge scaly, slimy back, and began pushing as hard as he could, quite a number of people saw  what he meant and rushed to both sides of the ship to do the same. and when, a  moment later, the sea serpents head appeared again, this time on the port side, and this  time with its back to them, then everyone understood.
the brute had made a loop of itself round the dawn treader and was  beginning to draw the loop tight. when it got quite tight - snap! - there would be floating  matchwood where the ship had been and it could pick them out of the water one by one. their  only chance was to push the loop backward till it slid over the stern; or else (to put  the same thing another way) to push the ship forward out of the loop.
reepicheep alone had, of course, no more chance of doing this than of  lifting up a cathedral, but he had nearly killed himself with trying before others  shoved him aside.
very soon the whole ships company except lucy and the mouse (which was  fainting)
was in two long lines along the two bulwarks, each mans chest to the back  of the man in front, so that the weight of the whole line was in the last man, pushing  for their lives. for a few sickening seconds (which seemed like hours) nothing appeared to  happen. joints cracked, sweat dropped, breath came in grunts and gasps. then they felt  that the ship was moving. they saw that the snake-loop was further from the mast than it had  been. but they also saw that it was smaller. and now the real danger was at hand.  could they get it over the poop, or was it already too tight? yes. it would just fit. it was  resting on the poop rails. a dozen or more sprang up on the poop. this was far better. the  sea serpents body was so low now that they could make a line across the poop and push  side by side.
hope rose high till everyone remembered the high carved stern, the dragon  tail, of the dawn treader. it would be quite impossible to get the brute over that.
"an axe," cried caspian hoarsely, "and still shove." lucy, who knew where  everything was, heard him where she was standing on the main deck staring up at the  poop. in a few seconds she had been below, got the axe, and was rushing up the ladder to  the poop. but just as she reached the top there came a great crashing noise like a tree  coming down and the ship rocked and darted forward. for at that very moment, whether  because the sea  
serpent was being pushed so hard, or because it foolishly decided to draw  the noose tight, the whole of the carved stern broke off and the ship was free.
the others were too exhausted to see what lucy saw. there, a few yards  behind them, the loop of sea serpents body got rapidly smaller and disappeared into a  splash. lucy always said (but of course she was very excited at the moment, and it may  have been only imagination) that she saw a look of idiotic satisfaction on the creatures  face. what is certain is that it was a very stupid animal, for instead of pursuing the  ship it turned its head round and began nosing all along its own body as if it expected to  find the wreckage of the dawn treader there. but the dawn treader was already well away,  running before a fresh breeze, and the men lay and sat panting and groaning all about the  deck, till presently they were able to talk about it, and then to laugh about it. and  when some rum had been served out they even raised a cheer; and everyone praised the  valour of eustace (though it hadnt done any good) and of reepicheep.
after this they sailed for three days more and saw nothing but sea and sky.  on the fourth day the wind changed to the north and the seas began to rise; by the  afternoon it had nearly become a gale. but at the same time they sighted land on their port  bow.
"by your leave, sire," said drinian, "we will try to get under the lee of  that country by rowing and lie in harbour, maybe till this is over." caspian agreed, but a  long row against the gale did not bring them to the land before evening. by the last light  of that day they steered into a natural harbour and anchored, but no one went ashore that  night. in the morning they found themselves in the green bay of a rugged, lonely-looking  country which sloped up to a rocky summit. from the windy north beyond that summit  clouds came streaming rapidly. they lowered the boat and loaded  her with any of the water casks which were now empty.
"which stream shall we water at, drinian?" said caspian as he took his seat  in the stern-sheets of the boat. "there seem to be two coming down into the bay.”
"it makes little odds, sire," said drinian. "but i think its a shorter  pull to that on the starboard-the eastern one.”
"here comes the rain," said lucy.
"i should think it does!" said edmund, for it was already pelting hard. "i  say, lets go to the other stream. there are trees there and well have some shelter.”
"yes, lets," said eustace. "no point in getting wetter than we need.”
but all the time drinian was steadily steering to the starboard, like  tiresome people in cars who continue at forty miles an hour while you are explaining to them  that they are on the wrong road.
"theyre right, drinian," said caspian. "why dont you bring her head round  and make for the western stream?”
"as your majesty pleases," said drinian a little shortly. he had had an  anxious day with the weather yesterday, and he didnt like advice from landsmen. but he  altered course; and it turned out afterwards that it was a good thing he did.
by the time they had finished watering, the rain was over and caspian, with  eustace, the pevensies, and reepicheep, decided to walk up to the top of the hill and  see what could be seen. it was a stiffish climb through coarse grass and heather and they  saw neither man nor beast, except seagulls. when they reached the top they saw that it was  a very small island, not more than twenty acres; and from this height the sea looked  larger and more desolate than it did from the deck, or even the fighting top, of the dawn  treader.
"crazy, you know," said eustace to lucy in a low voice, looking at the  eastern horizon.
"sailing on and on into that with no idea what we may get to." but he only  said it out of habit, not really nastily as he would have done at one time.
it was too cold to stay long on the ridge for the wind still blew freshly  from the north.
"dont lets go back the same way," said lucy as they turned; "lets go  along a bit and come down by the other stream, the one drinian wanted to go to.”
everyone agreed to this and after about fifteen minutes they were at the  source of the second river. it was a more interesting place than they had expected; a  deep little mountain lake, surrounded by cliffs except for a narrow channel on the  seaward side out of which the water flowed. here at last they were out of the wind, and all  sat down in the heather above the cliff for a rest.
all sat down, but one (it was edmund) jumped up again very quickly.
"they go in for sharp stones on this island," he said, groping about in the  heather. "where is the wretched thing? . . . ah, now ive got it . . . hullo! it wasnt a  stone at all, its a sword-hilt. no, by jove, its a whole sword; what the rust has left of it.  it must have lain here for ages.”
"narnian, too, by the look of it," said caspian, as they all crowded round.
"im sitting on something too," said lucy. "something hard." it turned out  to be the remains of a mail-shirt. by this time everyone was on hands and knees,  feeling in the thick heather in every direction. their search revealed, one by one, a  helmet, a dagger, and a few coins; not calormen crescents but genuine narnian "lions" and  "trees" such as you might see any day in the market-place of beaversdam or beruna.
"looks as if this might be all thats left of one of our seven lords," said  edmund.
"just what i was thinking," said caspian. "i wonder which it was. theres  nothing on the dagger to show. and i wonder how he died.”
"and how we are to avenge him," added reepicheep.
edmund, the only one of the party who had read several detective stories,  had meanwhile been thinking.
"look here," he said, "theres something very fishy about this. he cant  have been killed in a fight.”
"why not?" asked caspian.
"no bones," said edmund. "an enemy might take the armour and leave the  body. but who ever heard of a chap whod won a fight carrying away the body and  leaving the armour?”
"perhaps he was killed by a wild animal," lucy suggested.
"itd be a clever animal," said edmund, "that would take a mans mail shirt  off.”
"perhaps a dragon?" said caspian.
"nothing doing," said eustace. "a dragon couldnt do it. i ought to know.”
"well, lets get away from the place, anyway," said lucy. she had not felt  like sitting down again since edmund had raised the question of bones.
"if you like," said caspian, getting up. "i dont think any of this stuff  is worth taking away.”
they came down and round to the little opening where the stream came out of  the lake, and stood looking at the deep water within the circle of cliffs. if it had  been a hot day, no doubt some would have been tempted to bathe and everyone would have had a  drink.
indeed, even as it was, eustace was on the very point of stooping down and  scooping up some water in his hands when reepicheep and lucy both at the same moment  cried, "look," so he forgot about his drink and looked.
the bottom of the pool was made of large greyish-blue stones and the water  was perfectly clear, and on the bottom lay a life-size figure of a man, made  apparently of gold. it lay face downwards with its arms stretched out above its head. and  it so happened that as they looked at it, the clouds parted and the sun shone  out. the golden shape was lit up from end to end. lucy thought it was the most beautiful  statue she had ever seen.
"well!" whistled caspian. "that was worth coming to see! i wonder, can we  get it out?”
"we can dive for it, sire," said reepicheep.
"no good at all," said edmund. "at least, if its really gold - solid gold  - itll be far too heavy to bring up. and that pools twelve or fifteen feet deep if its an  inch. half a moment, though. its a good thing ive brought a hunting spear with me.  lets see what the depth is like. hold on to my hand, caspian, while i lean out over the  water a bit.”
caspian took his hand and edmund, leaning forward, began to lower his spear  into the water.
before it was half-way in lucy said, "i dont believe the statue is gold at  all. its only the light. your spear looks just the same colour.”
"whats wrong?" asked several voices at once; for edmund had suddenly let  go of the spear.
"i couldnt hold it," gasped edmund, "it seemed so heavy.”
"and there it is on the bottom now," said caspian, "and lucy is right. it  looks just the same colour as the statue.”
but edmund, who appeared to be having some trouble with his boots - at  least he was bending down and looking at them - straightened himself all at once and  shouted out in the sharp voice which people hardly ever disobey:  "get back! back from the water. all of you. at once!!”
they all did and stared at him.
"look," said edmund, "look at the toes of my boots.”
"they look a bit yellow," began eustace.
"theyre gold, solid gold," interrupted edmund. "look at them. feel them.  the leathers pulled away from it already. and theyre as heavy as lead.”
"by aslan!" said caspian. "you dont mean to say-?”
"yes, i do," said edmund. "that water turns things into gold. it turned the  spear into gold, thats why it got so heavy. and it was just lapping against my feet  (its a good thing i wasnt barefoot) and it turned the toe-caps into gold. and that poor  fellow on the bottom - well, you see.”
"so it isnt a statue at all," said lucy in a low voice.
"no. the whole thing is plain now. he was here on a hot day. he undressed  on top of the cliff - where we were sitting. the clothes have rotted away or been taken  by birds to line nests with; the armours still there. then he dived and -”
"dont," said lucy. "what a horrible thing.”
"and what a narrow shave weve had," said edmund.
"narrow indeed," said reepicheep. "anyones finger, anyones foot, anyones  whisker, or anyones tail, might have slipped into the water at any moment.”
"all the same," said caspian, "we may as well test it." he stooped down and  wrenched up a spray of heather. then, very cautiously, he knelt beside the pool and  dipped it in. it was heather that he dipped; what he drew out was a perfect model of heather  made of the purest gold, heavy and soft as lead.
"the king who owned this island," said caspian slowly, and his face flushed  as he spoke, "would soon be the richest of all the kings of the world. i claim this land  for ever as a narnian possession. it shall be called goldwater island. and i bind all of  you to secrecy.
no one must know of this. not even drinian - on pain of death, do you  hear?”
"who are you talking to?" said edmund. "im no subject of yours. if  anything its the other way round. i am one of the four ancient sovereigns of narnia and you  are under allegiance to the high king my brother.”
"so it has come to that, king edmund, has it?" said caspian, laying his  hand on his sword-hilt.
"oh, stop it, both of you," said lucy. "thats the worst of doing anything  with boys.
youre all such swaggering, bullying idiots - oooh! -" her voice died away  into a gasp.
and everyone else saw what she had seen.
across the grey hillside above them - grey, for the heather was not yet in  bloom - without noise, and without looking at them, and shining as if he were in bright  sunlight though the sun had in fact gone in, passed with slow pace the hugest lion that human  eyes have ever seen. in describing the scene lucy said afterwards, "he was the size of an  elephant,”
though at another time she only said, "the size of a cart-horse." but it  was not the size that mattered. nobody dared to ask what it was. they knew it was aslan.
and nobody ever saw how or where he went. they looked at one another like  people waking from sleep.
"what were we talking about?" said caspian. "have i been making rather an  ass of myself?”
"sire," said reepicheep, "this is a place with a curse on it. let us get  back on board at once. and if i might have the honour of naming this island, i should call  it deathwater.”
"that strikes me as a very good name, reep," said caspian, "though now that  i come to think of it, i dont know why. but the weather seems to be settling and i  dare say drinian would like to be off. what a lot we shall have to tell him.”
but in fact they had not much to tell for the memory of the last hour had  all become confused.
"their majesties all seemed a bit bewitched when they came aboard," said  drinian to rhince some hours later when the dawn treader was once more under sail and deathwater island already below the horizon. "something happened to them in  that place.
the only thing i could get clear was that they think theyve found the body  of one of these lords were looking for.”
"you dont say so, captain," answered rhince. "well, thats three. only  four more. at this rate we might be home soon after the new year. and a good thing too.  my baccys running a bit low. good night, sir.”





CHAPTER NINE

小.说.t|xt.天+
the island of the voices  and now the winds which had so long been from the north-west began to blow  from the west itself and every morning when the sun rose out of the sea the curved  prow of the dawn treader stood up right across the middle of the sun. some thought that  the sun looked larger than it looked from narnia, but others disagreed. and they  sailed and sailed before a gentle yet steady breeze and saw neither fish nor gull- nor ship  nor shore. and stores began to get low again, and it crept into their hearts that perhaps  they might have come to a sea which went on for ever. but when the very last day on which  they thought they could risk continuing their eastward voyage dawned, it showed, right  ahead between them and the sunrise, a low land lying like a cloud.
they made harbour in a wide bay about the middle of the afternoon and  landed. it was a very different country from any they had yet seen. for when they had  crossed the sandy beach they found all silent and empty as if it were an uninhabited land,  but before them there were level lawns in which the grass was as smooth and short as it  used to be in the grounds of a great english house where ten gardeners were kept. the trees,  of which there were many, all stood well apart from one another, and there were no  broken branches and no leaves lying on the ground. pigeons sometimes cooed but  there was no other noise.
presently they came to a long, straight, sanded path with not a weed  growing on it and trees on either hand. far off at the other end of this avenue they now  caught sight of a house - very long and grey and quiet-looking in the afternoon sun.
almost as soon as they entered this path lucy noticed that she had a little  stone in her shoe. in that unknown place it might have been wiser for her to ask the  others to wait while she took it out. but she didnt; she just dropped quietly behind and  sat down to take off her shoe. her lace had got into a knot.
before she had undone the knot the others were a fair distance ahead. by  the time she had got the stone out and was putting the shoe on again she could no longer  hear them. but almost at once she heard something else. it was not coming from the  direction of the house.
what she heard was a thumping. it sounded as if dozens of strong workmen  were hitting the ground as hard as they could with great wooden mallets. and it was very  quickly coming nearer. she was already sitting with her back to a tree, and as the  tree was not one she could climb, there was really nothing to do but to sit dead still and  press herself against the tree and hope she wouldnt be seen.
thump, thump, thump . . . and whatever it was must be very close now for  she could feel the ground shaking. but she could see nothing. she thought the thing - or  things must be just behind her. but then there came a thump on the path right in front of  her. she knew it was on the path not only by the sound but because she saw the sand scatter  as if it had been struck a heavy blow. but she could see nothing that had struck it.  then all the thumping noises drew together about twenty feet away from her and suddenly  ceased.
then came the voice.
it was really very dreadful because she could still see nobody at all. the  whole of that park-like country still looked as quiet and empty as it had looked when  they first landed.
nevertheless, only a few feet away from her, a voice spoke. and what it  said was:  "mates, nows our chance.”
instantly a whole chorus of other voices replied, "hear him. hear him. `now  s our chance, he said. well done, chief. you never said a truer word.”
"what i say," continued the first voice, "is, get down to the shore between  them and their boat, and let every mothers son look to his weapons. catch em when they  try to put to sea.”
"eh, thats the way," shouted all the other voices. "you never made a  better plan, chief.
keep it up, chief. you couldnt have a better plan than that.”
"lively, then, mates, lively," said the first voice. "off we go.
"right again, chief," said the others. "couldnt have a better order. just  what we were going to say ourselves. off we go.”
immediately the thumping began again - very loud at first but soon fainter  and fainter, till it died out in the direction of the sea.
lucy knew there was no time to sit puzzling as to what these invisible  creatures might be.
as soon as the thumping noise had died away she got up and ran along the  path after the others as quickly as her legs would carry her. they must at all costs be  warned.
while this had been happening the others had reached the house. it was a  low building - only two stories high made of a beautiful mellow stone, many-windowed, and  partially covered with ivy. everything was so still that eustace said, "i think its  empty," but caspian silently pointed to the column of smoke which rose from one  chimney.
they found a wide gateway open and passed through it into a paved  courtyard. and it was here that they had their first indication that there was something odd  about this island. in the middle of the courtyard stood a pump, and beneath the pump a  bucket.
there was nothing odd about that. but the pump handle was moving up and  down, though there seemed to be no one moving it.
"theres some magic at work here," said caspian.
"machinery!" said eustace. "i do believe weve come to a civilized country  at last.”
at that moment lucy, hot and breathless, rushed into the courtyard behind  them. in a low voice she tried to make them understand what she had overheard. and when  they had partly understood it even the bravest of them did not look very happy.
"invisible enemies," muttered caspian. "and cutting us off from the boat.  this is an ugly furrow to plough.”
"youve no idea what sort of creatures they are, lu?" asked edmund.
"how can i, ed, when i couldnt see them?”
"did they sound like humans from their footsteps?”
"i didnt hear any noise of feet - only voices and this frightful thudding  and thumping - like a mallet.”
"i wonder," said reepicheep, "do they become visible when you drive a sword  into them?”
"it looks as if we shall find out," said caspian. "but lets get out of  this gateway. theres one of these gentry at that pump listening to all we say.”
they came out and went back on to the path where the trees might possibly  make them less conspicuous. "not that its any good really," said eustace, "trying to  hide from people you cant see. they may be all round us.”
"now, drinian," said caspian. "how would it be if we gave up the boat for  lost, went down to another part of the bay, and signalled to the dawn treader to stand  in and take us aboard?”
"not depth for her, sire," said drinian.
"we could swim," said lucy.
"your majesties all," said reepicheep, "hear me. it is folly to think of  avoiding an invisible enemy by any amount of creeping and skulking. if these creatures  mean to bring us to battle, be sure they will succeed. and whatever comes of it id  sooner meet them face to face than be caught by the tail.”
"i really think reep is in the right this time," said edmund.
"surely," said lucy, "if rhince and the others on the dawn treader see us  fighting on the shore theyll be able to do something.”
"but they wont see us fighting if they cant see any enemy," said eustace  miserably.
"theyll think were just swinging our swords in the air for fun.”
there was an uncomfortable pause.
"well," said caspian at last, "lets get on with it. we must go and face  them. shake hands all round - arrow on the string, lucy - swords out, everyone else - and now  for it. perhaps theyll parley.”
it was strange to see the lawns and the great trees looking so peaceful as  they marched back to the beach. and when they arrived there, and saw the boat lying  where they had left her, and the smooth sand with no one to be seen on it, more than one  doubted whether lucy had not merely imagined all she had told them. but before they reached  the sand, a voice spoke out of the air.
"no further, masters, no further now," it said. "weve got to talk with you  first. theres fifty of us and more here with weapons in our fists.”
"hear him, hear him," came the chorus. "thats our chief. you can depend on  what he says. hes telling you the truth, he is.”
"i do not see these fifty warriors," observed reepicheep.
"thats right, thats right," said the chief voice. "you dont see us. and  why not?
because were invisible.”
"keep it up, chief, keep it up," said the other voices. "youre talking  like a book. they couldnt ask for a better answer than that.”
"be quiet, reep," said caspian, and then added in a louder voice, "you  invisible people, what do you want with us? and what have we done to earn your enmity?”
"we want something that little girl can do for us," said the chief voice.  (the others explained that this was just what they would have said themselves.)
"little girl!" said reepicheep. "the lady is a queen.”
"we dont know about queens," said the chief voice.
("no more we do, no more we do," chimed in the others.) "but we want  something she can do.”
"what is it?" said lucy.
"and if it is anything against her majestys honour or safety," added  reepicheep, "you will wonder to see how many we can kill before we die.”
"well," said the chief voice. "its a long story. suppose we all sit down?"  ,  the proposal was warmly approved by the other voices but the narnians  remained standing.
"well," said the chief voice. "its like this. this island has been the  property of a great magician time out of mind. and we all are - or perhaps in a manner of  speaking, i might say, we were - his servants. well, to cut a long story short, this magician  that i was speaking about, he told us to do something we didnt like. and why not?  because we didnt want to. well, then, this same magician he fell into a great rage;  for i ought to tell you he owned the island and he wasnt used to being crossed. he was  terribly downright, you know. but let me see, where am i? oh yes, this magician then, he goes  upstairs (for you must know he kept all his magic things up there and we all lived down  below), i say he goes upstairs and puts a spell on us. an uglifying spell. if you saw us  now, which in my opinion you may thank your stars you cant, you wouldnt believe what we  looked like before we were uglified. you wouldnt really. so there we all were so ugly  we couldnt bear to look at one another. so then what did we do? well, ill tell you  what we did. we waited till we thought this same magician would be asleep in the afternoon  and we creep upstairs and go to his magic book, as bold as brass, to see if we can do  anything about this uglification. but we were all of a sweat and a tremble, so i wont  deceive you. but, believe me or believe me not, i do assure you that we couldnt find any  thing in the way of a spell for taking off the ugliness. and what with time getting on and  being afraid that  
the old gentleman might wake up any minute - i was all of a muck sweat, so  i wont deceive you - well, to cut a long story short, whether we did right or  whether we did wrong, in the end we see a spell for making people invisible. and we  thought wed rather be invisible than go on being as ugly as all that. and why? because wed  like it better. so my little girl, whos just about your little girls age, and a sweet child  she was before she was uglified, though now - but least said soonest mended - i say, my little  girl she says the spell, for its got to be a little girl or else the magician himself,  if you see my meaning, for otherwise it wont work. and why not? because nothing happens. so my  clipsie says the spell, for i ought to have told you she reads beautifully, and there we  all were as invisible as you could wish to see. and i do assure you it was a relief not  to see one anothers faces. at first, anyway. but the long and the short of it is  were mortal tired of being invisible. and theres another thing. we never reckoned on this  magician (the one i was telling you about before) going invisible too. but we havent ever seen  him since. so we dont know if hes dead, or gone .away, or whether hes just sitting  upstairs being invisible, and perhaps coming down and being invisible there. and, believe  me, its no manner of use listening because he always did go about with his bare feet  on, making no more noise than a great big cat. and ill tell all you gentlemen straight,  its getting more than what our nerves can stand.”
such was the chief voices story, but very much shortened, because i have  left out what the other voices said. actually he never got out more than six or seven  words without being interrupted by their agreements and encouragements, which drove the  narnians nearly out of their minds with impatience. when it was over there was a  very long silence.
"but," said lucy at last, "whats all this got to do with us? i dont  understand.”
"why, bless me, if i havent gone and left out the whole point," said the  chief voice.
"that you have, that you have," roared the other voices with great  enthusiasm. "no one couldnt have left it out cleaner and better. keep it up, chief, keep it  up.”
"well, i neednt go over the whole story again," began the chief voice.
"no. certainly not," said caspian and edmund.
"well, then, to put it in a nutshell," said the chief voice, "weve been  waiting for ever so long for a nice little girl from foreign parts, like it might be you,  missie - that would go upstairs and go to the magic book and find the spell that takes off the  invisibleness, and say it. and we all swore that the first strangers as landed on this island  (having a nice little girl with them, i mean, for if they hadnt itd be another matter)  we wouldnt let them go away alive unless theyd done the needful for us. and thats why,  gentlemen, if your little girl doesnt come up to scratch, it will be our painful duty to cut  all your throats.
merely in the way of business, as you might say, and no offence, i hope.”
"i dont see all your weapons," said reepicheep. "are they invisible too?"  the words were scarcely out of his mouth before they heard a whizzing sound and next  moment a spear had stuck, quivering, in one of the trees behind them.
"thats a spear, that is," said the chief voice.
"that it is, chief, that it is," said the others. "you couldnt have put it  better.”
"and it came from my hand," the chief voice continued. "they get visible  when they leave us.”
"but why do you want me to do this?" asked lucy.
"why cant one of your own people? havent you got any girls?”
"we dursent, we dursent," said all the voices. "were not going upstairs  again.”
"in other words," said caspian, "you are asking this lady to face some  danger which you darent ask your own sisters and daughters to face!”
"thats right, thats right," said all the voices cheerfully. "you couldnt  have said it better.
eh, youve had some education, you have. anyone can see that.”
"well, of all the outrageous - " began edmund, but lucy interrupted.
"would i have to go upstairs at night, or would it do in daylight?”
"oh, daylight, daylight, to be sure," said the chief voice. "not at night.  no ones asking you to do that. go upstairs in the dark? ugh.”
"all right, then, ill do it," said lucy. "no," she said, turning to the  others, "dont try to stop me. cant you see its no use? there are dozens of them there. we  cant fight them.
and the other way there is a chance.”
"but a magician!" said caspian.
"i know," said lucy. "but he maynt be as bad as they make out. dont you  get the idea that these people are not very brave?”
"theyre certainly not very clever," said eustace.
"look here, lu," said edmund. "we really cant let you do a thing like  this. ask reep, im sure hell say just the same.”
"but its to save my own life as well as yours," said lucy. "i dont want  to be cut to bits with invisible swords any more than anyone else.”
"her majesty is in the right," said reepicheep. "if we had any assurance of  saving her by battle, our duty would be very-plain. it appears to me that we have none.  and the service they ask of her is in no way contrary to her majestys honour, but a noble  and heroical act. if the queens heart moves her to risk the magician, i will not speak  against it.”
as no one had ever known reepicheep to be afraid of anything, he could say  this without feeling at all awkward. but the boys, who had all been afraid quite often,  grew very red.
none the less, it was such obvious sense that they had to give in. loud  cheers broke from the invisible people when their decision was announced, and the chief voice  (warmly supported by all the others) invited the narnians to come to supper and  spend the night.
eustace didnt want to accept, but lucy said, "im sure theyre not  treacherous. theyre not like that at all," and the others agreed. and so, accompanied by an  enormous noise of thumpings (which became louder when they reached the flagged and echoing  courtyard)
they all went back to the house.





CHAPTER TEN

www.lzuowen.com
the magicians book  the invisible people feasted their guests royally. it was very funny to see  the plates and dishes coming to the table and not to see anyone carrying them. it would  have been funny even if they had moved along level with the floor, as you would expect  things to do in invisible hands. but they didnt. they progressed up the long dining-hall  in a series of bounds or jumps. at the highest point of each jump a dish would be about  fifteen feet up in the air; then it would come down and stop quite suddenly about three  feet from the floor. when the dish contained anything like soup or stew the result was  rather disastrous.
"im beginning to feel very inquisitive about these people," whispered  eustace to edmund. "do you think theyre human at all? more like huge grasshoppers or  giant frogs, i should say.”
"it does look like it," said edmund. "but dont put the idea of the  grasshoppers into lucys head. shes not too keen on insects; especially big ones.”
the meal would have been pleasanter if it had not been so exceedingly  messy, and also if the conversation had not consisted entirely of agreements. the invisible  people agreed about everything. indeed most of their remarks were the sort it would not  be easy to disagree with: "what i always say is, when a chaps hungry, he likes some  victuals," or "getting dark now; always does at night," or even "ah, youve come over the  water.
powerful wet stuff, aint it?" and lucy could not help looking at the dark  yawning entrance to the foot of the staircase - she could see it from where she sat  - and wondering what she would find when she went up those stairs next morning. but it was  a good meal  
otherwise, with mushroom soup and boiled chickens and hot boiled ham and gooseberries, redcurrants, curds, cream, milk, and mead. the others liked  the mead but eustace was sorry afterwards that he had drunk any.
when lucy woke up next morning it was like waking up on the day of an  examination or a day when you are going to the dentist. it was a lovely morning with bees  buzzing in and out of her open window and the lawn outside looking very like somewhere in  england.
she got up and dressed and tried to talk and eat ordinarily at breakfast.  then, after being instructed by the chief voice about what she was to do upstairs, she bid  goodbye to the others, said nothing, walked to the bottom of the stairs, and began going  up them without once looking back.
it was quite light, that was one good thing. there was, indeed, a window  straight ahead of her at the top of the first flight. as long as she was 9n that flight she  could hear the tick-tock-tick-tock of a grandfather clock in the hall below. then she came to  the landing and had to turn to her left up the next flight; after that she couldnt hear  the clock any more.
now she had come to the top of the stairs. lucy looked and saw a long, wide  passage with a large window at the far end. apparently the passage ran the whole  length of the house. it was carved and panelled and carpeted and very many doors opened  off it on each side. she stood still and couldnt hear the squeak of a mouse, or the  buzzing of a fly, or the swaying of a curtain, or anything - except the beating of her own  heart.
"the last doorway on the left," she said to herself. it did seem a bit hard  that it should be the last. to reach it she would have to walk past room after room. and in  any room there might be the magician - asleep, or awake, or invisible, or even dead. but  it wouldnt do to think about that. she set out on her journey. the carpet was so thick that  her feet made no noise.
"theres nothing whatever to be afraid of yet," lucy told herself. and  certainly it was a quiet, sunlit passage; perhaps a bit too quiet. it would have been nicer if  there had not been strange signs painted in scarlet on the doors twisty, complicated  things which obviously had a meaning and it mightnt be a very nice meaning either. it  would have been nicer still if there werent those masks hanging on the wall. not that  they were exactly ugly - or not so very ugly - but the empty eye-holes did look  queer, and if you let yourself you would soon start imagining that the masks were doing things as  soon as your back was turned to them.
after about the sixth door she got her first real fright. for one second  she felt almost certain that a wicked little bearded face had popped out of the wall and  made a grimace at her. she forced herself to stop and look at it. and it was not a face at  all. it was a little mirror just the size and shape of her own face, with hair on the top of it  and a beard hanging down from it, so that when you looked in the mirror your own face  fitted into the hair and beard and it looked as if they belonged to you. "i just caught my  own reflection with the tail of my eye as i went past," said lucy to herself. "that was  all it was. its quite  
harmless." but she didnt like the look of her own face with that hair and  beard, and went on. (i dont know what the bearded glass was for because i am not a  magician.)
before she reached the last door on the left, lucy was beginning to wonder  whether the corridor had grown longer since she began her journey and whether this was  part of the magic of the house. but she got to it at last. and the door was open.
it was a large room with three big windows and it was lined from floor to  ceiling with books; more books than lucy had ever seen before, tiny little books, fat  and dumpy books, and books bigger than any church bible you have ever seen, all bound  in leather and smelling old and learned and magical. but she knew from her  instructions that she need not bother about any of these. for the book, the magic book, was lying  on a reading-desk in the very middle of the room. she saw she would have to read  it standing (and anyway there were no chairs) and also that she would have to stand  with her back to the door while she read it. so at once she turned to shut the door.
it wouldnt shut.
some people may disagree with lucy about this, but i think she was quite  right. she said she wouldnt have minded if she could have shut the door, but that it was  unpleasant to have to stand in a place like that with an open doorway right behind your  back. i should have felt just the same. but there was nothing else to be done.
one thing that worried her a good deal was the size of the book. the chief  voice had not been able to give her any idea whereabouts in the book the spell for making  things visible came. he even seemed rather surprised at her asking. he expected  her to begin at the beginning and go on till she came to it; obviously he had never thought  that there was any other way of finding a place in a book. "but it might take me days and  weeks!" said lucy, looking at the huge volume, "and i feel already as if id been in  this place for hours.”
she went up to the desk and laid her hand on the book; her fingers tingled  when she touched it as if it were full of electricity. she tried to open it but  couldnt at first; this, however, was only because it was fastened by two leaden clasps, and when  she had undone these it opened easily enough. and what a book it was!
it was written, not printed; written in a clear, even hand, with thick  downstrokes and thin upstrokes, very large, easier than print, and so beautiful that lucy stared  at it for a whole minute and forgot about reading it. the paper was crisp and smooth and a  nice smell came from it; and in the margins, and round the big coloured capital  letters at the beginning of each spell, there were pictures.
there was no title page or title; the spells began straight away, and at  first there was nothing very important in them. they were cures for warts (by washing your  hands in moonlight in a silver basin) and toothache and cramp, and a spell for  taking a swarm of bees. the picture of the man with toothache was so lifelike that it would  have set your  
own teeth aching if you looked at it too long, and the golden bees which  were dotted all round the fourth spell looked for a moment as if they were really flying.
lucy could hardly tear herself away from that first page, but when she  turned over, the next was just as interesting. "but i must get on," she told herself. and on  she went for about thirty pages which, if she could have remembered them, would have  taught her how to find buried treasure, how to remember things forgotten, how to  forget things you wanted to forget, how to tell whether anyone was speaking the truth, how to  call up (or prevent) wind, fog, snow, sleet or rain, how to produce enchanted sleeps  and how to give a man an asss head (as they did to poor bottom). and the longer she read  the more wonderful and more real the pictures became.
then she came to a page which was such a blaze of pictures that one hardly  noticed the writing. hardly - but she did notice the first words. they were, an  infallible spell to make beautiful her that uttereth it beyond the lot of mortals. lucy peered  at the pictures with her face close to the page, and though they had seemed crowded and  muddlesome before, she found she could now see them quite clearly. the first was a  picture of a girl standing at a reading-desk reading in a huge book. and the girl was dressed  exactly like lucy. in the next picture lucy (for the girl in the picture was lucy  herself) was standing up with her mouth open and a rather terrible expression on her face,  chanting or reciting something. in the third picture the beauty beyond the lot of mortals had  come to her. it was strange, considering how small the pictures had looked at first, that  the lucy in the picture now seemed quite as big as the real lucy; and they looked into each  others eyes and the real lucy looked away after a few minutes because she was dazzled  by the beauty of the other lucy; though she could still see a sort of likeness to herself  in that beautiful face. and now the pictures came crowding on her thick and fast. she saw  herself throned on high at a great tournament in calormen and all the kings of the world  fought because of her beauty. after that it turned from tournaments to real wars, and all  narnia and archenland, telmar and calormen, galma and terebinthia, were laid waste  with the fury of the kings and dukes and great lords who fought for her favour. then it  changed and lucy, still beautiful beyond the lot of mortals, was back in england. and  susan (who had always been the beauty of the family) came home from america. the susan in  the picture looked exactly like the real susan only plainer and with a nasty  expression. and susan was jealous of the dazzling beauty of lucy, but that didnt matter a bit  because no one cared anything about susan now.
"i will say the spell," said lucy. "i dont care. i will.”
she said i dont care because she had a strong feeling that she mustnt.
but when she looked back at the opening words of the spell, there in the  middle of the writing, where she felt quite sure there had been no picture before, she  found the great face of a lion, of the lion, aslan himself, staring into hers. it was  painted such a bright gold that it seemed to be coming towards her out of the page; and indeed  she never was quite sure afterwards that it hadnt really moved a little. at any rate she  knew the  
expression on his face quite well. he was growling and you could see most  of his teeth.
she became horribly afraid and turned over the page at once.
a little later she came to a spell which would let you know what your  friends thought about you. now lucy had wanted very badly to try the other spell, the one  that made you beautiful beyond the lot of mortals. so she felt that to make up for not  having said it, she really would say this one. and all in a hurry, for fear her mind would  change, she said the words (nothing will induce me to tell you what they were). then she waited  for something to happen.
as nothing happened she began looking at the pictures. and all at once she  saw the very last thing she expected - a picture of a third-class carriage in a train,  with two schoolgirls sitting in it. she knew them at once. they were marjorie preston and anne  featherstone.
only now it was much more than a picture. it was alive. she could see the  telegraph posts flicking past outside the window. then gradually (like when the radio is  "coming on")
she could hear what they were saying.
"shall i see anything of you this term?" said anne, "or are you still going  to be all taken up with lucy pevensie. “
"dont know what you mean by taken up," said marjorie.
"oh yes, you do," said anne. "you were crazy about her last term.”
"no, i wasnt," said marjorie. "ive got more sense than that. not a bad  little kid in her way. but i was getting pretty tired of her before the end of term.”
"well, you jolly well wont have the chance any other term!" shouted lucy.  "two-faced little beast." but the sound of her own voice at once reminded her that she  was talking to a picture and that the real marjorie was far away in another world.
"well," said lucy to herself, "i did think better of her than that. and i  did all sorts of things for her last term, and i stuck to her when not many other girls  would. and she knows it too. and to anne featherstone of all people! i wonder are all my  friends the same? there are lots of other pictures. no. i wont look at any more. i  wont, i wont and with a great effort she turned over the page, but not before a large, angry  tear had splashed on it.
on the next page she came to a spell "for the refreshment of the spirit.  the pictures were fewer here but very beautiful. and what lucy found herself reading was more  like a story than a spell. it went on for three pages and before she had read to the  bottom of the page she had forgotten that she was reading at all. she was living in the story  as if it were real, and all the pictures were real too. when she had got to the third page and  come to the end, she said, "that is the loveliest story ive ever read or ever shall  read in my whole life. oh, i wish i could have gone on reading it for ten years. at least  ill read it over again.”
but here part of the magic of the book came into play. you couldnt turn  back. the right-hand pages, the ones ahead, could be turned; the left-hand pages could not.
"oh, what a shame!" said lucy. "i did so want to read it again. well, at  least i must remember it. lets see . . . it was about . . . about . . . oh dear, its  all fading away again.
and even this last page is going blank. this is a very queer book. how can  i have forgotten? it was about a cup and a sword and a tree and a green hill, i  know that much.
but i cant remember and what shall i do?”
and she never could remember; and ever since that day what lucy means by a  good story is a story which reminds her of the forgotten story in the magicians book.
she turned on and found to her surprise a page with no pictures at all; but  the first words were a spell to make hidden things visible. she read it through to make  sure of all the hard words and then said it out loud. and she knew at once that it was  working because as she spoke the colours came into the capital letters at the top of the  page and the pictures began appearing in the margins. it was like when you hold to the  fire something written in invisible ink and the writing gradually shows up; only instead  of the dingy colour of lemon juice (which is the easiest invisible ink) this was all  gold and blue and scarlet. they were odd pictures and contained many figures that lucy did  not much like the look of. and then she thought, "i suppose ive made everything visible,  and not only the thumpers. there might be lots of other invisible things hanging about a  place like this. im not sure that i want to see them all.”
at that moment she heard soft, heavy footfalls coming along the corridor  behind her; and of course she remembered what she had been told about the magician walking  in his bare feet and making no more noise than a cat. it is always better to turn round  than to have anything creeping up behind your back. lucy did so.
then her face lit up till, for a moment (but of course she didnt know it),  she looked almost as beautiful as that other lucy in the picture, and she ran forward  with a little cry of delight and with her arms stretched out. for what stood in the doorway  was aslan himself, the lion, the highest of all high kings. and he was solid and real  and warm and he let her kiss him and bury herself in his shining mane. and from the  low, earthquake-like sound that came from inside him, lucy even dared to think  that he was purring.
"oh, aslan," said she, "it was kind of you to come.”
"i have been here all the time," said he, "but you have just made me  visible.”
"aslan!" said lucy almost a little reproachfully. "dont make fun of me. as  if anything 1 could do would make you visible!”
"it did," said aslan. "do you think i wouldnt obey my own rules?”
after a little pause he spoke again.
"child," he said, "i think you have been eavesdropping.”
"eavesdropping?”
"you listened to what your two schoolfellows were saying about you.”
"oh that? i never thought that was eavesdropping, aslan. wasnt it magic?”
"spying on people by magic is the same as spying on them in any other way.  and you have misjudged your friend. she is weak, but she loves you. she was afraid  of the older girl and said what she does not mean.”
"i dont think id ever be able to forget what i heard her say.”
"no, you wont.”
"oh dear," said lucy. "have i spoiled everything? do you mean we would have  gone on being friends if it hadnt been for this - and been really great friends -  all our lives perhaps- and now we never shall.”
"child," said aslan, "did i not explain to you once before that no one is  ever told what would have happened?”
"yes, aslan, you did," said lucy. "im sorry. but please -”
"speak on, dear heart.”
"shall i ever be able to, read that story again; the one i couldnt  remember? will you tell it to me, aslan? oh do, do, do.”
"indeed, yes, i will tell it to you for years and years. but now, come. we  must meet the master of this house.”





CHAPTER ELEVEN

小,说t,xt,天,堂
the dufflepuds made happy  lucy followed the great lion out into the passage and at once she saw  coming towards them an old man, barefoot, dressed in a red robe. his white hair was  crowned with a  
chaplet of oak leaves, his beard fell to his girdle, and he supported  himself with a curiously carved staff. when he saw aslan he bowed low and said,  "welcome, sir, to the least of your houses.”
"do you grow weary, coriakin, of ruling such foolish subjects as i have  given you here?”
"no," said the magician, "they are very stupid but there is no real harm in  them. i begin to grow rather fond of the creatures. sometimes, perhaps, i am a little  impatient, waiting for the day when they can be governed by wisdom instead of this rough  magic.”
"all in good time, coriakin," said aslan.
"yes, all in very good time, sir," was the answer. "do you intend to show  yourself to them?”
"nay," said the lion, with a little half-growl that meant (lucy thought)  the same as a laugh. "i should frighten them out of their senses. many stars will grow  old and come to take their rest in islands before your people are ripe for that. and today  before sunset i must visit trumpkin the dwarf where he sits in the castle of cair paravel  counting the days till his master caspian comes home. i will tell him all your story,  lucy. do not look so sad. we shall meet soon again.”
"please, aslan," said lucy, "what do you call soon?”
"i call all times soon," said aslan; and instantly he was vanished away and  lucy was alone with the magician.
"gone!" said he, "and you and i quite crestfallen. its always like that,  you cant keep him; its not as if he were a tame lion. and how did you enjoy my book?”
"parts of it very much indeed," said lucy. "did you know i was there all  the time?”
"well, of course i knew when i let the duffers make themselves invisible  that you would be coming along presently to take the spell off. i wasnt quite sure of the  exact day. and i wasnt especially on the watch this morning. you see they had made me  invisible too and being invisible always makes me so sleepy. heigh-ho - there im yawning  again. are you hungry?”
"well, perhaps i am a little," said lucy. "ive no idea what the time is.”
"come," said the magician. "all times may be soon to aslan; but in my home  all hungry times are one oclock.”
he led her a little way down the passage and opened a door. passing in,  lucy found herself in a pleasant room full of sunlight and flowers. the table was bare  when they  
entered, but it was of course a magic table, and at a word from the old man  the tablecloth, silver, plates, glasses and food appeared.
"i hope that is-what you would like," said he. "i have tried to give you  food more like the food of your own land than perhaps you have had lately.”
"its lovely," said lucy, and so it was; an omelette, piping hot, cold lamb  and green peas, a strawberry ice, lemonsquash to drink with the meal and a cup of chocolate  to follow.
but the magician himself drank only wine and ate only bread. there was  nothing alarming about him, and lucy and he were soon chatting away like old  friends.
"when will the spell work?" asked lucy. "will the duffers be visible again  at once?”
"oh yes, theyre visible now. but theyre probably all asleep still; they  always take a rest in the middle of the day.”
"and now that theyre visible, are you going to let them off being ugly?  will you make them as they were before?”
"well, thats rather a delicate question," said the magician. "you see,  its only they who think they were so nice to look at before. they say theyve been uglified,  but that isnt what i called it. many people might say the change was for the better.”
"are they awfully conceited?”
"they are. or at least the chief duffer is, and hes taught all the rest to  be. they always believe every word he says.”
"wed noticed that," said lucy.
"yes - wed get on better without him, in a way. of course i could turn him  into something else, or even put a spell on him which would make them not  believe a word he said. but i dont like to do that. its better for them to admire him than  to admire nobody.”
"dont they admire you?" asked lucy.
"oh, not me," said the magician. "they wouldnt admire me.”
"what was it you uglified them for - i mean, what they call uglified?”
"well, they wouldnt do what they were told. their work is to mind the  garden and raise food - not for me, as they imagine, but for themselves. they wouldnt do it  at all if i didnt make them. and of course for a garden you want water. there is a beautiful  spring about half a mile away up the hill. and from that spring there flows a stream  which comes right past the garden. all i asked them to do was to take their water from the  stream instead of trudging up to the spring with their buckets two or three times a day and  tiring themselves  
out besides spilling half of it on the way back. but they wouldnt see it.  in the end they refused point blank.”
"are they as stupid as all that?" asked lucy.
the magician sighed. "you wouldnt believe the troubles ive had with them.  a few months ago they were all for washing up the plates and knives before  dinner: they said it saved time afterwards. ive caught them planting boiled potatoes to save  cooking them when they were dug up. one day the cat got into the dairy and twenty of  them were at work moving all the milk out; no one thought of moving the cat. but i see  youve finished. lets go and look at the duffers now they can be looked at.”
they went into another room which was full of polished instruments hard to  understand - such as astrolabes, orreries, chronoscopes, poesimeters, choriambuses and  theodolinds - and here, when they had come to the window, the magician said, "there.  there are your duffers.”
"i dont see anybody," said lucy. "and what are those mushroom things?”
the things she pointed at were dotted all over the level grass. they were  certainly very like mushrooms, but far too big - the stalks about three feet high and the  umbrellas about the same length from edge to edge. when she looked carefully she noticed  too that the stalks joined the umbrellas not in the middle but at one side which gave an  unbalanced look to them. and there was something - a sort of little bundle - lying on  the grass at the foot of each stalk. in fact the longer she gazed at them the less like  mushrooms they appeared. the umbrella part was not really round as she had thought at  first. it was longer than it was broad, and it widened at one end. there were a great many of  them, fifty or more.
the clock struck three.
instantly a most extraordinary thing happened. each of the "mushrooms"  suddenly turned upside-down. the little bundles which had lain at the bottom of the stalks  were heads and bodies. the stalks themselves were legs. but not two legs to each body.  each body had a single thick leg right under it (not to one side like the leg of a one- legged man) and at the end of it, a single enormous foot-a broadtoed foot with the toes curling up  a little so that it looked rather like a small canoe. she saw in a moment why they had  looked like mushrooms. they had been lying flat on their backs each with its single leg  straight up in the air and its enormous foot spread out above it. she learned afterwards  that this was their ordinary way of resting; for the foot kept off both rain and sun and  for a monopod to lie under its own foot is almost as good as being in a tent.
"oh, the funnies, the funnies," cried lucy, bursting into laughter. "did  you make them like that?”
"yes, yes. i made the duffers into monopods," said the magician. he too was  laughing till the tears ran down his cheeks. "but watch," he added.
it was worth watching. of course these little one-footed men couldnt walk  or run as we do. they got about by jumping, like fleas or frogs. and what jumps they  made! as if each big foot were a mass of springs. and with what a bounce they came down;  that was what made the thumping noise which had so puzzled lucy yesterday. for now they  were jumping in all directions and calling out to one another, "hey, lads! were  visible again.”
"visible we are," said one in a tasselled red cap who was obviously the  chief monopod.
"and what i say is, when chaps are visible, why, they can see one another.”
"ah, there it is, there it is, chief," cried all the others. "theres the  point. no ones got a clearer head than you. you couldnt have made it plainer.”
"she caught the old man napping, that little girl did," said the chief  monopod. "weve beaten him this time.”
"just what we were, going to say ourselves," chimed the chorus. "youre  going stronger than ever today, chief. keep it up, keep it up.”
"but do they dare to talk about you like that?" said lucy. "they seemed to  be so afraid of you yesterday. dont they know you might be listening?”
"thats one of the funny things about the duffers," said the magician. "one  minute they talk as if i ran everything and overheard everything and was extremely  dangerous. the next moment they think they can take me in by tricks that a baby would see  through - bless them!”
"will they have to be turned back into their proper shapes?" asked lucy.  "oh, i do hope it wouldnt be unkind to leave them as they are. do they really mind very  much? they seem pretty happy. i say - look at that jump. what were they like before?”
"common little dwarfs," said he. "nothing like so nice as the sort you have  in narnia.”
"it would be a pity to change them back," said lucy. "theyre so funny: and  theyre rather nice. do you think it would make any difference if i told them that?”
"im sure it would - if you could get it into their heads.”
"will you come with me and try?”
"no, no. youll get on far better without me.”
"thanks awfully for the lunch," said lucy and turned quickly away. she ran  down the stairs which she had come up so nervously that morning and cannoned into  edmund at  
the bottom. all the others were there with him waiting, and lucys  conscience smote her when she saw their anxious faces and realized how long she had forgotten  them.
"its all right," she shouted. "everythings all right. the magicians a  brick - and ive seen him - aslan.”
after that she went from them like the wind and out into the garden. here  the earth was shaking with the jumps and the air ringing with the shouts of the monopods.  both were redoubled when they caught sight of her.
"here she comes, here she comes," they cried. "three cheers for the little  girl. ah! she put it across the old gentleman properly, she did.”
"and were extremely regrettable," said the chief monopod, "that we cant  give you the pleasure of seeing us as we were before we were uglified, for you wouldnt  believe the difference, and thats the truth, for theres no denying were mortal ugly  now, so we wont deceive you.”
"eh, that we are, chief, that we are," echoed the others, bouncing like so  many toy balloons. "youve said it, youve said it.”
"but i dont think you are at all," said lucy, shouting to make herself  heard. "i think you look very nice.”
"hear her, hear her," said the monopods. "true for you, missie. very nice  we look. you couldnt find a handsomer lot." they said this without any surprise and did  not seem to notice that they had changed their minds.
"shes a-saying," remarked the chief monopod, "as how we looked very nice  before we were uglified.”
"true for you, chief, true for you," chanted the others. "thats what she  says. we heard her ourselves.”
"i did not," bawled lucy. "i said youre very nice now.”
"so she did, so she did," said the chief monopod, "said we were very nice  then.”
"hear em both, hear em both," said the monopods. "theres a pair for you.  always right.
they couldnt have put it better.”
"but were saying just the opposite," said lucy, stamping her foot with  impatience.
"so you are, to be sure, so you are," said the monopods. "nothing like an  opposite. keep it up, both of you.”
"youre enough to drive anyone mad," said lucy, and gave it up. but the  monopods seemed perfectly contented, and she decided that on the whole the  conversation had been a success.
and before everyone went to bed that evening something else happened which  made them even more satisfied with their one-legged condition. caspian and all  the narnians went back as soon as possible to the shore to give their news to rhince and  the others on board the dawn treader, who were by now very anxious. and, of course, the  monopods went with them, bouncing like footballs and agreeing with one another in  loud voices till eustace said, "i wish the magician would make them inaudible instead of  invisible." (he was soon sorry he had spoken because then he had to explain that an  inaudible thing is something you cant hear, and though he took a lot of trouble he never felt  sure that the monopods had really understood, and what especially annoyed him was that  they said in the end, "eh, he cant put things the way our chief does. but youll learn,  young man.
hark to him. hell show you how to say things. theres a speaker for you!")  when they reached the bay, reepicheep had a brilliant idea. he had his little coracle  lowered and paddled himself about in it till the monopods were thoroughly interested.  he then stood up in it and said, "worthy and intelligent monopods, you do not need boats.  each of you has a foot that will do instead. just jump as lightly as you can on the  water and see what happens.”
the chief monopod hung back and warned the others that theyd find the  water powerful wet, but one or two of the younger ones tried it almost at once; and then a  few others followed their example, and at last the whole lot did the same. it worked  perfectly. the huge single foot of a monopod acted as a natural raft or boat, and when  reepicheep had taught them how to cut rude paddles for themselves, they all paddled about  the bay and round the dawn treader, looking for all the world like a fleet of little  canoes with a fat dwarf standing up in the extreme stern of each. and they had races, and  bottles of wine were lowered down to them from the ship as prizes, and the sailors stood  leaning over the ships sides and laughed till their own sides ached.
the duffers were also very pleased with their new name of monopods, which  seemed to them a magnificent name though they never got it right. "thats what we  are," they bellowed, "moneypuds, pomonods, poddymons. just what it was on the tips of  our tongues to call ourselves." but they soon got it mixed up with their old  name of duffers and finally settled down to calling themselves the dufflepuds; and that is  what they will probably be called for centuries.
that evening all the narnians dined upstairs with the magician, and lucy  noticed how different the whole top floor looked now that she was no longer afraid of  it. the mysterious signs on the doors were still mysterious but now looked as if  they had kind and cheerful meanings, and even the bearded mirror now seemed funny rather  than frightening. at dinner everyone had by magic what everyone liked best to  eat and drink, and after dinner the magician did a very useful and beautiful piece of  magic. he laid two blank sheets of parchment on the table and asked drinian to give him an  exact account of their voyage up to date: and as drinian spoke, everything he described came  out on the  
parchment in fine clear lines till at last each sheet was a splendid map of  the eastern ocean, showing galma, terebinthia, the seven isles, the lone islands,  dragon island, burnt island, deathwater, and the land of the duffers itself, all exactly  the right sizes and in the right positions. they were the first maps ever made of those seas  and better than any that have been made since without magic. for on these, though the towns  and mountains looked at first just as they would on an ordinary map, when the  magician lent them a magnifying glass you saw that they were perfect little pictures of  the real things, so that you could see the very castle and slave market and streets in  narrowhaven, all very clear though very distant, like things seen through the wrong end of a  telescope. the only drawback was that the coastline of most of the islands was incomplete,  for the map showed only what drinianhad seen with his own eyes. when they were finished  the.
magician kept one himself and presented the other to caspian: it still  hangs in his chamber of instruments at cair paravel. but the magician could tell them  nothing about seas or lands further east. he did, however, tell them that about seven  years before a narnian ship had put in at his waters and that she had on board the lords  revilian, argoz, mavramorn and rhoop: so they judged that the golden man they had seen lying  in deathwater must be the lord restimar.
next day, the magician magically mended the stern of the dawn treader where  it had been damaged by the sear serpent and loaded her with useful gifts. there  was a most friendly parting, and when she sailed, two hours after noon, all the  dufflepuds paddled out with her to the harbour mouth, and cheered until she was out of sound  of their cheering.

 www．Ｌｚｕｏｗｅｎ．ｃｏｍ



CHAPTER TWELVE

xiaoshuotxt
the dark island  after this adventure they sailed on south and a little east for twelve days  with a gentle wind, the skies being mostly clear and the air warm, and saw no bird or  fish, except that once there were whales spouting a long way to starboard. lucy and  reepicheep played a good deal of chess at this time. then on the thirteenth day, edmund, from  the fighting top, sighted what looked like a great dark mountain rising out of the sea  on their port bow.
they altered course and made for this land, mostly by oar, for the wind  would not serve them to sail north-east. when evening fell they were still a long way from  it and rowed all night. next morning the weather was fair but a flat calm. the dark mass  lay ahead, much nearer and larger, but still very dim, so that some thought it was  still a long way off and others thought they were running into a mist.
about nine that morning, very suddenly, it was so close that they could see  that it was not land at all, nor even, in an ordinary sense, a mist. it was a darkness. it  is rather hard to  
describe, but you will see what it was like if you imagine yourself looking  into the mouth of a railway tunnel - a tunnel either so long or so twisty that you cannot  see the light at the far end. and you know what it would be like. for a few feet you would  see the rails and sleepers and gravel in broad daylight; then there would come a place  where they were in twilight; and then, pretty suddenly, but of course without a sharp  dividing line, they would vanish altogether into smooth, solid blackness. it was just so  here. for a few feet in front of their bows they could see the swell of the bright  greenish-blue water.
beyond that, they could see the water looking pale and grey as it would  look late in the evening. but beyond that again, utter blackness as if they had come to the  edge of moonless and starless night.
caspian shouted to the boatswain to keep her back, and all except the  rowers rushed forward and gazed from the bows. but there was nothing to be seen by  gazing. behind them was the sea and the sun, before them the darkness.
"do we go into this?" asked caspian at length.
"not by my advice," said drinian.
"the captains right," said several sailors.
"i almost think he is," said edmund.
lucy and eustace didnt speak but they felt very glad inside at the turn  things seemed to be taking. but all at once the clear voice of reepicheep broke in upon the  silence.
"and why not?" he said. "will someone explain to me why not.”
no one was anxious to explain, so reepicheep continued:  "if i were addressing peasants or slaves," he said, "i might suppose that  this suggestion proceeded from cowardice. but i hope it will never be told in narnia that a  company of noble and royal persons in the flower of their age turned tail because they  were afraid of the dark.”
"but what manner of use would it be ploughing through that blackness?"  asked drinian.
"use?" replied reepicheep. "use, captain? if by use you mean filling our  bellies or our purses, i confess it will be no use at all. so far as i know we did not set  sail to look for things useful but to seek honour and adventure. and here is as great an  adventure as ever i heard of, and here, if we turn back, no tittle impeachment of all our  honours.”
several of the sailors said things under their breath that sounded like  "honour be blowed", but caspian said:   
"oh, bother you, reepicheep. i almost wish wed left you at home. all  right! if you put it that way, i suppose we shall have to go on. unless lucy would rather not?”
lucy felt that she would very much rather not, but what she said out loud  was, "im game.”
"your majesty will at least order lights?" said drinian.
"by all means," said caspian. "see to it, captain.”
so the three lanterns, at the stern, and the prow and the masthead, were  all lit, and drinian ordered two torches amidships. pale and feeble they looked in the  sunshine. then all the men except some who were left below at the oars were ordered on  deck and fully armed and posted in their battle stations with swords drawn. lucy and two  archers were posted on the fighting top with bows bent and arrows on the string. rynelf  was in the bows with his line ready to take soundings. reepicheep, edmund, eustace and  caspian, glittering in mail, were with him. drinian took the tiller.
"and now, in aslans name, forward!" cried caspian. "a slow, steady stroke.  and let every man be silent and keep his ears open for orders.”
with a creak and a groan the dawn treader started to creep forward as the  men began to row. lucy, up in the fighting top, had a wonderful view of the exact moment  at which they entered the darkness. the bows had already disappeared before the  sunlight had left the stern. she saw it go. at one minute the gilded stern, the blue sea, and  the sky, were all in broad daylight: next minute the sea and sky had vanished, the stern  lantern - which had been hardly noticeable before - was the only thing to show where the ship  ended. in front of the lantern she could see the black shape of drinian crouching at the  tiller. down below her the two torches made visible two small patches of deck and  gleamed on swords and helmets, and forward there was another island of light on the  forecastle. apart from that, the fighting top, lit by the masthead light which was only just above  her, seemed to be a little lighted world of its own floating in lonely darkness. and the  lights themselves, as always happens with lights when you have to have them at the wrong time  of day, looked lurid and unnatural. she also noticed that she was very cold.
how long this voyage into the darkness lasted, nobody knew. except for the  creak of the rowlocks and the splash of the oars there was nothing to show that they  were moving at all. edmund, peering from the bows, could see nothing except the reflection  of the lantern in the water before him. it looked a greasy sort of reflection, and the  ripple made by their advancing prow appeared to be heavy, small, and lifeless. as time went on  everyone except the rowers began to shiver with cold.
suddenly, from somewhere - no ones sense of direction was very clear by  now - there came a cry, either of some inhuman voice or else a voice of one in such  extremity of terror that he had almost lost his humanity.
caspian was still trying to speak - his mouth was too dry - when the shrill  voice of reepicheep, which sounded louder than usual in that silence, was heard.
"who calls?" it piped. "if you are a foe we do not fear you, and if you are  a friend your enemies shall be taught the fear of us.”
"mercy!" cried the voice. "mercy! even if you are only one more dream, have  merry.
take me on board. take me, even if you strike me dead. but in the name of  all mercies do not fade away and leave me in this horrible land.”
"where are you?" shouted caspian. "come aboard and welcome.”
there came another cry, whether of joy or terror, and then they knew that  someone was swimming towards them.
"stand by to heave him up, men," said caspian.
"aye, aye, your majesty," said the sailors. several crowded to the port  bulwark with ropes and one, leaning far out over the side, held the torch. a wild, white  face appeared in the blackness of the water, and then, after some scrambling and pulling,  a dozen friendly hands had heaved the stranger on board.
edmund thought he had never seen a wilder-looking man. though he did not  otherwise look very old, his hair was an untidy mop of white, his face was thin and  drawn, and, for clothing, only a few wet rags hung about him. but what one mainly noticed  were his eyes, which were so widely opened that he seemed to have no eyelids at all,  and stared as if in an agony of pure fear. the moment his feet reached the deck he said:  "fly! fly! about with your ship and fly! row, row, row for your lives away  from this accursed shore.”
"compose yourself," said reepicheep, "and tell us what the danger is. we  are not used to flying.”
the stranger started horribly at the voice of the mouse, which he had not  noticed before.
"nevertheless you will fly from here," he gasped. "this is the island where  dreams come true.”
"thats the island ive been looking for this long time," said one of the  sailors. "i reckoned id find i was married to nancy if we landed here.”
"and id find tom alive again," said another.
"fools!" said the man, stamping his foot with rage. "that is the sort of  talk that brought me here, and id better have been drowned or never born. do you hear what i  say? this is  
where dreams -dreams, do you understand, come to life, come real. not  daydreams: dreams.”
there was about half a minutes silence and then, with a great clatter of  armour, the whole crew were tumbling down the main hatch as quick as they could and flinging  themselves on the oars to row as they had never rowed before; and drinian was swinging  round the tiller, and the boatswain was giving out the quickest stroke that had ever  been heard at sea. for it had taken everyone just that halfminute to remember certain  dreams they had had - dreams that make you afraid of going to sleep again - and to realize  what it would mean to land on a country where dreams come true.
only reepicheep remained unmoved.
"your majesty, your majesty," he said, "are you going to tolerate this  mutiny, this poltroonery? this is a panic, this is a rout.”
"row, row," bellowed caspian. "pull for all our lives. is her head right,  drinian? you can say what you like, reepicheep. there are some things no man can face.”
"it is, then, my good fortune not to be a man," replied reepicheep with a  very stiff bow.
lucy from up aloft had heard it all. in an instant that one of her own  dreams which she had tried hardest to forget came back to her as vividly as if she had only  just woken from it. so that was what was behind them, on the island, in the darkness! for a  second she wanted to go down to the deck and be with edmund and caspian. but what was  the use?
if dreams began coming true, edmund and caspian themselves might turn into  something horrible just as she reached them. she gripped the rail of the fighting top  and tried to steady herself. they were rowing back to the light as hard as they could:  it would be all right in a few seconds. but oh, if only it could be all right now!
though the rowing made a good deal of noise it did not quite conceal the  total silence which surrounded the ship.
everyone knew it would be better not to listen, not to strain his ears for  any sound from the darkness. but no one could help listening. and soon everyone was  hearing things.
each one heard something different.
"do you hear a noise like . . . like a huge pair of scissors opening and  shutting .. . over there?" eustace asked rynelf.
"hush!" said rynelf. "i can hear them crawling up the sides of the ship.”
"its just going to settle on the mast," said caspian.
"ugh!" said a sailor. "there are the gongs beginning. i knew they would.”
caspian, trying not to look at anything (especially not to keep looking  behind him), went aft to drinian.
"drinian," he said in a very low voice. "how long did we take rowing in? -  i mean rowing to where we picked up . the stranger.”
"five minutes, perhaps," whispered drinian. "why?”
"because weve been more than that already trying to get out.”
drinians hand shook on the tiller and a line of cold sweat ran down his  face. the same idea was occurring to everyone on board. "we shall never get out, never  get out,”
moaned the rowers. "hes steering us wrong. were going round and round in  circles. we shall never get out." the stranger, who had been lying in a huddled heap on  the deck, sat up and burst out into a horrible screaming laugh.
"never get out!" he yelled. "thats it. of course. we shall never get out.  what a fool i was to have thought they would let me go as easily as that. no, no, we  shall never get out.”
lucy leant her head on the edge of the fighting top and whispered, "aslan,  aslan, if ever you loved us at all, send us help now." the darkness did not grow any less,  but she began to feel a little - a very, very little - better. "after all, nothing has  really happened to us yet," she thought.
"look!" cried rynelfs voice hoarsely from the bows. there was a tiny speck  of light ahead, and while they watched a broad beam of light fell from it upon the  ship. it did not alter the surrounding darkness, but the whole ship was lit up as if by  searchlight. caspian blinked, stared round, saw the faces of his companions all with wild, fixed  expressions.
everyone was staring in the same direction: behind everyone lay his black,  sharply-edged shadow.
lucy looked along the beam and presently saw something in it. at first it  looked like a cross, then it looked like an aeroplane, then it looked like a kite, and at  last with a whirring of wings it was right overhead and was an albatross. it circled  three times round the mast and then perched for an instant on the crest of the gilded dragon  at the prow. it called out in a strong sweet voice what seemed to be words though no one  understood them. after that it spread its wings, rose, and began to fly slowly ahead,  bearing a little to starboard. drinian steered after it not doubting that it offered good  guidance. but no one except lucy knew that as it circled the mast it had whispered to her,  "courage, dear heart," and the voice, she felt sure, was aslans, and with the voice a  delicious smell breathed in her face.
in a few moments the darkness turned into a greyness ahead, and then,  almost before they dared to begin hoping, they had shot out into the sunlight and were in the  warm, blue world again. and all at once everybody realized that there was nothing to  be afraid of and  
never had been. they blinked their eyes and looked about them. the  brightness of the ship herself astonished them: they had half expected to find that the  darkness would cling to the white and the green and the gold in the form of some grime or scum.  and then first one, and then another, began laughing.
"i reckon weve made pretty good fools of ourselves," said rynelf.
lucy lost no time in coming down to the deck, where she found the others  all gathered round the newcomer. for a long time he was too happy to speak, and could  only gaze at the sea and the sun and feel the bulwarks and the ropes, as if to make sure  he was really awake, while tears rolled down his cheeks.
"thank you," he said at last. "you have saved me from . . . but i wont  talk of that. and now let me know who you are. i am a telmarine of narnia, and when i was  worth anything men called me the lord rhoop.”
"and i," said caspian, "am caspian, king of narnia, and i sail to find you  and your companions who were my fathers friends.”
lord rhoop fell on his knees and kissed the kings hand. "sire," he said,  "you are the man in all the world i most wished to see. grant me a boon.”
"what is it?" asked caspian.
"never to bring me back there," he said. he pointed astern. they all  looked. but they saw only bright blue sea and bright blue sky. the dark island and the darkness  had vanished for ever.
"why!" cried lord rhoop. "you have destroyed it!”
"i dont think it was us," said lucy.
"sire," said drinian, "this wind is fair for the southeast. shall i have  our poor fellows up and set sail? and after that, every man who can be spared, to his hammock.”
"yes," said caspian, "and let there be grog all round. heigh-ho, i feel i  could sleep the clock round myself.”
so all afternoon with great joy they sailed south-east with a fair wind.  but nobody noticed when the albatross had disappeared.





CHAPTER THIRTEEN

ｗｗｗ．ｘｉａ book．ｃｏｍ
the three sleepers  the wind never failed but it grew gentler every day till at length the  waves were little more than ripples, and the ship glided on hour after hour almost as if they  were sailing on a lake. and every night they saw that there rose in the east new  constellations which no one had ever seen in narnia and perhaps, as lucy thought with a mixture of  joy and fear, no living eye had seen at all. those new stars were big and bright and the  nights were warm. most of them slept on deck and talked far into the night or hung over  the ships side watching the luminous dance of the foam thrown up by their bows.
on an evening of startling beauty, when the sunset behind them was so  crimson and purple and widely spread that the very sky itself seemed to have grown  larger, they came in sight of land on their starboard bow. it came slowly nearer and the  light behind them made it look as if the capes and headlands of this new country were all on  fire. but presently they were sailing along its coast and its western cape now rose  up astern of them, black against the red sky and sharp as if it was cut out of  cardboard, and then they could see better what this country was like. it had no mountains but many  gentle hills with slopes like pillows. an attractive smell came from it - what lucy  called "a dim, purple kind of smell", which edmund said (and rhince thought) was rot, but  caspian said, "i know what you mean.”
they sailed on a good way, past point after point, hoping to find a nice  deep harbour, but had to content themselves in the end with a wide and shallow bay. though it  had seemed calm out at sea there was of course surf breaking on the sand and they  could not bring the dawn treader as far in as they would have liked. they dropped anchor a good  way from the beach and had a wet and tumbling landing in the boat. the lord rhoop  remained on board the dawn treader. he wished to see no more islands. all the time that  they remained in this country the sound of the long breakers was in their ears.
two men were left to guard the boat and caspian led the others inland, but  not far because it was too late for exploring and the light would soon go. but  there was no need to go far to find an adventure. the level valley which lay at the head of  the bay showed no road or track or other sign of habitation. underfoot was tine springy  turf dotted here and there with a low bushy growth which edmund and lucy took for heather.  eustace, who was really rather good at botany; said it wasnt, and he was probably  right; but it was something of very much the same kind.
when they had gone less than a bowshot from the shore, drinian said, "look!  whats that?" and everyone stopped.
"are they great trees?" said caspian.
"towers, l think," said eustace.
"it might be giants," said edmund in a lower voice.
"the way to find out is to go right iv among them," said reepicheep,  drawing his sword and pattering off ahead of everyone else.
"i think its a ruin," said lucy when they had got a good deal nearer, and  her guess was the best so far. what they now saw was a wide oblong space flagged with  smooth stones and surrounded by grey pillars but unroofed. and from end to end of it ran  a long table laid with a rich crimson cloth that came down nearly to the pavement. at  either side of it were many chairs of stone richly carved and with silken cushions upon the  seats. but on the table itself there was set out such a banquet as had never been seen,  not even when peter the high king kept his court at cair paravel. there were turkeys and  geese and peacocks, there were boars heads and sides of venison, there were pies  shaped like ships under full sail or like dragons and elephants, there were ice puddings and  bright lobsters and gleaming salmon, there were nuts and grapes, pineapples and peaches,  pomegranates and melons and tomatoes. there were flagons of gold and silver and  curiouslywrought glass; and the smell of the fruit and the wine blew towards them like a  promise of all happiness.
"i say!" said lucy.
they came nearer and nearer, all very quietly.
"but where are the guests?" asked eustace.
"we can provide that, sir," said rhince.
"look!" said edmund sharply. they were actually within the pillars now and  standing on the pavement. everyone looked where edmund had pointed. the chairs were not  all empty. at the head of the table and in the two places beside it there was  something- or possibly three somethings.
"what are those?" asked lucy in a whisper. "it looks like three beavers  sitting on the table.”
"or a huge birds nest," said edmund.
"it looks more like a haystack to me," said caspian.
reepicheep ran forward, jumped on a chair and thence on to the table, and  ran along it, threading his way as nimbly as a dancer between jewelled cups and pyramids  of fruit and -ivory salt-cellars. he ran right up to the mysterious grey mass at the  end: peered, touched, and then called out:  "these will not fight, i think.”
everyone now came close and saw that what sat in those three chairs was  three men, though hard to recognize as men till you looked closely. their hair, which  was grey, had  
grown over their eyes till it almost concealed their, faces, and their  beards had grown over the table, climbing pound and entwining plates and goblets as  brambles; entwine a fence, until, all mixed in one great mat of hair, they flowed over the edge  and down to the floor. and from their heads the hair hung over the backs of their chairs so  that they were wholly hidden. in fact the three men were; nearly all hair.
"dead?" said caspian.
"i think not, sire," said reepicheep, lifting one of their hands out of its  tangle of hair in his two paws. "this one is warm and his pulse beats.”
"this one, too, and this," said drinian.
"why, theyre only asleep," said eustace.
"its been a long sleep, though," said edmund, "to let their hair grow like  this.”
"it must be an enchanted sleep," said lucy. "i felt the moment we landed on  this island that it was full of magic. oh! do you think we have perhaps come here to  break it?”
"we can try," said caspian, and began shaking the nearest of the three  sleepers. for a moment everyone thought he was going to be successful, for the man breathed  hard and muttered, "ill go eastward no more. out oars for narnia." but he sank back  almost at once into a yet deeper sleep than before: that is, his heavy head sagged a  few inches lower towards the table and all efforts to rouse him again were useless.  with the second it was much the same. "werent born to live like animals. get to the east  while youve a chance - lands behind the sun," and sank down. and the third only said,  "mustard, please," and slept hard.
"out oars for narnia, eh?" said drinian.
"yes," said caspian, "you are right, drinian. i think our quest is at an  end. lets look at their rings. yes, these are their devices. this is the lord revilian. this  is the lord argoz: and this, the lord mavramorn.”
"but we cant wake them," said lucy. "what are we to do?”
"begging your majesties pardons all," said rhince, "but why not fall to  while youre discussing it? we dont see a dinner like this every day.”
"not for your life!" said caspian.
"thats right, thats right," said several of the sailors.
"too much magic about here. the sooner were back on board the better.”
"depend upon it," said reepicheep, "it was from eating this food that these  three lords came by a seven years sleep.”
"i wouldnt touch it to save my life," said drinian.
"the lights going uncommon quick," said rynelf.
"back to ship, back to ship," muttered the men.
"i really think," said edmund, "theyre right. we can decide what to do  with the three sleepers tomorrow. we darent eat the food and theres no point in staying  here for the night. the whole place smells of magic - and danger.”
"i am entirely of king edmunds opinion," said reepicheep, "as far as  concerns the ships company in general. but i myself will sit at this table till sunrise.”
"why on earth?" said eustace.
"because," said the mouse, "this is a very great adventure, and no danger  seems to me so great as that of knowing when i get back to narnia that i left a mystery  behind me through fear.”
"ill stay with you, reep," said edmund.
"and i too," said caspian.
"and me," said lucy. and then eustace volunteered also. this was very brave  of him because never having read of such things or even heard of them till he  joined the dawn treader made it worse for him than for the others.
"i beseech your majesty -" began drinian.
"no, my lord," said caspian. "your place is with the ship, and you have had  a days work while we five have idled." there was a lot of argument about this but  in the end caspian had his way. as the crew marched off to the shore in the gathering  dusk none of the five watchers, except perhaps reepicheep, could avoid a cold feeling in  the stomach.
they took some time choosing their seats at the perilous table. probably  everyone had the same reason but no one said it out loud. for it was really a rather nasty  choice. one could hardly bear to sit all night next to those three terrible hairy objects  which, if not dead, were certainly not alive in the ordinary sense. on the other hand, to sit  at the far end, so that you would see them less and less as the night grew darker, and  wouldnt know if they were moving, and perhaps wouldnt see them at all by about two oclock no,  it was not to be thought of. so they sauntered round and round the table saying, "what  about here?”
and "or perhaps a bit further on," or, "why not on this side?" till at last  they settled down somewhere about the middle but nearer to the sleepers than to the other  end. it was about  
ten by now and almost dark. those strange new constellations burned in the  east. lucy would have liked it better if they had been the leopard and the ship and  other old friends of the narnian sky.
they wrapped themselves in their sea cloaks and sat still and waited. at  first there was some attempt at talk but it didnt come to much. and they sat and sat. and  all the time they heard the waves breaking on the beach.
after hours that seemed like ages there came a moment when they all knew  they had been dozing a moment before but were all suddenly wide awake. the stars  were all in quite different positions from those they had last noticed. the sky was  very black except for the faintest possible greyness in the east. they were cold, though  thirsty, and stiff.
and none of them spoke because now at last something was happening.
before them, beyond the pillars, there was the slope of a low hill. and now  a door opened in the hillside, and light appeared in the doorway, and a figure came out,  and the door shut behind it. the figure carried a light, and this light was really all  that they could see distinctly. it came slowly nearer and nearer till at last it stood right at  the table opposite to them. now they could see that it was a tall girl, dressed in a single long  garment of clear blue which left her arms bare. she was bareheaded and her yellow hair hung  down her back. and when they looked at her they thought they had never before known  what beauty meant.
the light which she had been carrying was a tall candle in a silver  candlestick which she now set upon the table. if there had been any wind off the sea earlier in  the night it must have died down by now, for the flame of the candle burned as straight and  still as if it were in a room with the windows shut and the curtains drawn. gold and  silver on the table shone in its light.
lucy now noticed something lying lengthwise on the table which had escaped  her attention before. it was a knife of stone, sharp as steel, a cruel-looking,  ancient looking thing.
no one had yet spoken a word. then - reepicheep first, and caspian next -  they all rose to their feet, because they felt that she was a great lady.
"travellers who have come from far to aslans table," said the girl. "why  do you not eat and drink?”
"madam," said caspian, "we feared the food because we thought it had cast  our friends into an enchanted sleep.
"they have never tasted it," she said.
"please," said lucy, "what happened to them?”
"seven years ago," said the girl, "they came here in a ship whose sails  were rags and timbers ready to fall apart. there were a few others with them, sailors,  and when they came to this table one said, `here is the good place. let us set sail and  reef sail and row no longer but sit down and end our days in peace! and the second said,  `no, let us re-embark and sail for narnia and the west; it may be that miraz is dead. but  the third, who was a very masterful man, leaped up and said, `no, by heaven. we are men  and telmarines, not brutes. what should we do but seek adventure after  adventure? we have not long to live in any event. let us spend what is left in seeking the  unpeopled world behind the sunrise. and as they quarrelled he caught up the knife of stone  which lies there on the table and would have fought with his comrades. but it is a  thing not right for him to touch. and as his fingers closed upon the hilt, deep sleep fell upon  all the three.
and till the enchantment is undone they will never wake.”
"what is this knife of stone?" asked eustace.
"do none of you know it?" said the girl.
"i - i think," said lucy, "ive seen something like it before. it was a  knife like it that the white witch used when she killed aslan at the stone table long ago.”
"it was the same.," said the girl, "and it was brought here to be kept in  honour while the world lasts.”
edmund, who had been looking more and more uncomfortable for the last few  minutes, now spoke.
"look here," he said, "i hope im not a coward - about eating this food, i  mean - and im sure i dont mean to be rude. but we have had a lot of queer adventures on  this voyage of ours and things arent always what they seem. when i look in your face i  cant help believing all you say: but then thats just what might happen with a witch  too. how are we to know youre a friend?”
"you cant know," said the girl. "you can only believe or not.”
after a moments pause reepicheeps small voice was heard.
"sire," he said to caspian, "of your courtesy fill my cup with wine from  that flagon: it is too big for me to lift. i will drink to the lady.”
caspian obeyed and the mouse, standing on the table, held up a golden cup  between its tiny paws and said, "lady, i pledge you." then it fell to on cold peacock,  and in a short while everyone else followed its example. all were very hungry and the  meal, if not quite what you wanted for a very early breakfast, was excellent as a very late  supper.
"why is it called aslans table?" asked lucy presently.
"it is set here by his bidding," said the girl, "for those who come so far.  some call this island the worlds end, for though you can sail further, this is the  beginning of the end.”
"but how does the food keep?" asked the practical eustace.  ?
"it is eaten, and renewed every day," said the girl. "this you will see.”
"and what are we to do about the sleepers?" asked caspian. "in the world  from which my friends come" (here, he nodded at eustace and the pevensies) "they have  a story of a prince or a king coming to a castle where all the people lay in an  enchanted sleep. in that story he could not dissolve the enchantment until he had kissed the  princess.”
"but here," said the girl, "it is different. here he cannot kiss the  princess till he has dissolved the enchantment.”
"then," said caspian, "in the name of aslan, show me how to set about that  work at once.”
"my father will teach you that," said the girl.
"your father!" said everyone. "who is he? and where?”
"look," said the girl, turning round and pointing at the door in the  hillside. they could see it more easily now, for while they had been talking the stars had grown  fainter and great gaps of white light were appearing in the greyness of the eastern  sky.





CHAPTER FOURTEEN

小?说?txt?天堂
the beginning of the end of the world  slowly the door opened again and out there came a figure as tall and  straight as the girls but not so slender. it carried no light but light seemed to come from it.  as it came nearer, lucy saw that it was like an old man. his silver beard came down to his  bare feet in front and his saver hair hung down to his heels behind and his robe appeared to  be made from the fleece of silver sheep. he looked so mild and grave that once more all  the travellers rose to their feet and stood in silence.
but the old man came on without speaking to the travellers and stood on the  other side of the table opposite to his daughter. then both of them held up their arms  before them and turned to face the east. in that position the began to sing. i wish i could  write down the song, but one who was present could remember it. lucy said afterwards that  it was high, almost shrill, but very beautiful, cold kind of song, an early morning kind  of song. and they sang, the grey clouds lifted from the eastern sky a the white patches  grew bigger and  
bigger till it was white, and the sea began to shine like silver. and long  afterwards (but those two sang all the time) the east began to turn red and at last,  unclouded, the sun came up out the sea and its long level ray shot down the length of the  table on the gold and silver sand on the stone knife.
once or twice before, the narnians had wondered whether the sun at its  rising did not look bigger in these seas than it had looked at home. this time they we  certain. there was no mistaking it. and the brightness its ray on the dew and on the table  was far beyond an. morning brightness they had ever seen. and as edmu said  afterwards, "though lots of things happened on that trip which sound more exciting,  that moment was really the most exciting." for now they knew that they had truly come  to the beginning of the end of the world.
then something seemed to be flying at them out of the very centre of the  rising sun: but of course one couldnt look steadily in that direction to make sure. but  presently the air became full of voices - voices which took up same song that the lady and  her father were singing, but in far wilder tones and in a language which no one knew  and soon after that the owners of these voices could be seen. they were birds, large and  white, and they came hundreds and thousands and alighted on everything; the grass, and the  pavement, on the table, on your shoulders, your hands, and your head, till it looked  as heavy snow had fallen. for, like snow, they not only make everything white but blurred  and blunted all shapes. but lucy, looking out from between the wings of the birds that  covered her, saw one bird fly to the old man with something in its beak that looked like  a little fruit, unless it was a little live coal, which it might have been, for it was too  bright to look at.
and the bird laid it in the old mans mouth.
then the birds stopped their singing and appeared to be very busy about the  table. when they rose from it again everything on the table that could be eaten or  drunk had disappeared. these birds rose from their meal in their thousands and  hundreds and carried away all the things that could not be eaten or drunk, such as bones, rinds,  and shells, and took their flight back to the rising sun. but now, because they were not  singing, the whir of their wings seemed to set the whole air a-tremble. and there was the  table pecked clean and empty, and the three old lords of narnia still fast asleep.
now at last the old man turned to the travellers and bade them welcome.
"sir," said caspian, "will you tell us how to undo the enchantment which  holds these three narnian lords asleep.”
"i will gladly tell you that, my son," said the old man. "to break this  enchantment you must sail to the worlds end, or as near as you can come to it, and you  must come back having left at least one of your company behind.”
"and what must happen to that one?" asked reepicheep.
"he must go on into the utter east and never return into the world.”
"that is my hearts desire," said reepicheep.
"and are we near the worlds end now, sir?" asked caspian. "have you any  knowledge of the seas and lands further east than this?”
"i saw them long ago," said the old man, "but it was from a great height. i  cannot tell you such things as sailor need to know.”
"do you mean you were flying in the air?" eustace blurted out.
"i was a long way above the air, my son," replied the old man. "i am  ramandu. but i see that you stare at on another and have not heard this name. and no wonder,  for the days when i was a star had ceased long before any of you knew this world, and  all the constellations have changed.”
"golly," said edmund under his breath. "hes a retired star.”
"arent you a star any longer?" asked lucy.
"i am a star at rest, my daughter," answered ramandu  "when i set for the last time, decrepit and old beyond all that you can  reckon, i was carried to this island. i am not so old now as i was then. every morning a  bird brings me a fire-berry from the valleys in the sun, and each fire-berry takes away a  little of my age.
and when i have become as young as the child that was born yesterday, then  i shall take my rising again (for we are at earths eastern rim) and once more tread the  great dance.”
"in our world," said eustace, "a star is a huge ball of flaming gas.”
"even in your world, my son, that is not what a star is but only what it is  made of. and in this world you ave already met a star, for i think you have been with  coriakin.”
"is he a retired star, too?" said lucy.
"well, not quite the same," said ramandu. "it was not quite as a rest than  he was set to govern the duffers. you might call it a punishment. he might have shone for  thousands of years more in the southern winter sky if all had gone well.”
"what did he do, sir?" asked caspian.
"my son," said ramandu, "it is not for you, a son of adam, to know what  faults a star can commit. but come, we waste time in such talk. are you yet resolved? will  you sail further east and come again, leaving one to return no more, and so break  the enchantment? or will you sail westward?”
"surely, sire," said reepicheep, "there is no question about that? it is  very plainly part of our quest to rescue these three lords from enchantment.”
"i think the same, reepicheep," replied caspian. "and even if it were not  so, it would break my heart not to go as near the worlds end as the dawn treader will  take us. but i am thinking of the crew. they signed on to seek the seven lords, not to  reach the rim of the earth. if we sail east from here we sail to find the edge, the utter  east. and not one knows how far it is. theyre brave fellows, but i set signs that some of  them are weary of the voyage and long to have our prow pointing to narnia again. i dont  think should take them further without their knowledge an consent. and then theres the poor  lord rhoop.
hes broken man.”
"my son," said the star, "it would be no use, even though you wished it, to  sail for the worlds end with men unwilling or men deceived. that is not how great  unenchantments are achieved. they must know where they go and why. but who is this broken  man you speak of?”
caspian told ramandu the story of rhoop.
"i can give him what he needs most," said ramandu. "i this island there is  sleep without stint or measure, and sleep in which no faintest footfall of a dream was  ever heard. let him sit beside these other three and drink oblivion till you return.”
"oh, do lets do that, caspian," said lucy. "im sure its just what he  would love.”
at that moment they were interrupted by the sound of many feet and voices:  drinian and the rest of the ship company were approaching. they halted in surprise whey  they saw ramandu and his daughter; and then, because these were obviously great  people, every man uncovered his head. some sailors eyed the empty dishes and flagons on  the table with regret.
"my lord," said the king to drinian, "pray send two men back to the dawn  treader with a message to the lord rhoop. tell him that the last of his old shipmates  are here asleep - a sleep without dreams - and that he can share it.”
when this had been done, caspian told the rest to sit down and laid the  whole situation before them. when he had finished there was a long silence and some  whispering until presently the master bowman got to his feet, and said:  "what some of us have been wanting to ask for a long time, your majesty, is  how were ever to get home when we do turn, whether we turn here or somewhere else.  its been west and north-west winds all the way, barring an occasional calm. and if  that doesnt change, id like to know what hopes we have of seeing narnia again. theres  not much chance of supplies lasting while we row all that way.
"thats landsmans talk," said drinian. "theres always a prevailing west  wind in these seas all through the late summer, and it always changes after the new year.  well have plenty of wind for sailing westward; more than we shall like from all  accounts.”
"thats true, master," said an old sailor who was a galmian by birth. "you  get some ugly weather rolling up from the east in january and february. and by your  leave, sire, if i was in command of this ship id say to winter here and begin the voyage  home in march.”
"whatd you eat while you were wintering here?" asked eustace.
"this table," said ramandu, "will be filled with a kings feast every day  at sunset.”
"now youre talking!" said several sailors.
"your majesties and gentlemen and ladies all," said rynelf, "theres just  one thing i want to say. theres not one of us chaps as was pressed on this journey. were  volunteers. and theres some here chat are looking very hard at that table and thinking  about kings feasts who were talking very loud about adventures on the day we sailed from cair  paravel, and swearing they wouldnt come home till wed found the end of the world. and  there were some standing on the quay who would have given all they had to come with  us. it was thought a finer thing then to have a cabin-boys berth on the dawn treader  than to wear a knights belt. i dont know if you get the hang of what im saying. but  what i mean is that i think chaps who set out like us will look as silly as - as those  dufflepuds - if we come home and say we got to the beginning of the worlds end and hadnt the  heart to go further.”
some of the sailors cheered at this but some said that that was all very  well.
"this isnt going to be much fun," whispered edmund to caspian. "what are  we to do if half those fellows hang back?”
"wait," caspian whispered back. "ive still a card to play.”
"arent you going to say anything, reep?" whispered lucy.
"no. why should your majesty expect it?" answered reepicheep in a voice  that most people heard. "my owns plans are made. while i can, i sail east in the dawn  treader.
when she fails me, i paddle east in my coracle. when she sinks, i shall  swim east with my four paws. and when i can swim no longer, if i have not reached aslans  country, or shot over the edge of the world in some vast cataract, i shall sink with my  nose to the sunrise and peepiceek will be head of the talking mice in narnia.”
"hear, hear," said a sailor, "ill say the same, barring the bit about the  coracle, which wouldnt bear me." he added in a lower voice, "im not going to be outdone  by a mouse.”
at this point caspian jumped to his feet. "friends," he said, "i think you  have not quite understood our purpose. you talk as if we had come to you with our hat in  our hand, begging for shipmates. it isnt like that at all. we and our royal brother  and sister and their kinsman and sir reepicheep, the good knight, and the lord drinian  have an errand to the worlds edge. it is our pleasure to choose from among such of you as  are willing those whom we deem worthy of so high an enterprise. we have not said that  any can come for the asking. that is why we shall now command the lord drinian and  master rhince to consider carefully what men among you are the hardest in battle,  the most skilled seamen, the purest in blood, the most loyal to our person, and the  cleanest of life and manners; and to give their names to us in a schedule." he paused and  went on in a quicker voice, "aslans mane!" he exclaimed. "do you think that the  privilege of seeing the last things is to be bought for a song? why, every man that comes with  us shall bequeath the title of dawn treader to all his descendants, and when we land  at cair paravel on the homeward voyage he shall have either gold or land enough to  make him rich all his life. now - scatter over the island, all of you. in half an  hours time i shall receive the names that lord drinian brings me.”
there was rather a sheepish silence and then the crew made their bows and  moved away, one in this direction and one in that, but mostly in little knots or  bunches, talking.
"and now for the lord rhoop," said caspian.
but turning to the head of the table he saw that rhoop was already there.  he had arrived, silent and unnoticed, while the discussion was going on, and was seated  beside the lord argoz. the daughter of ramandu stood beside him as if she had just helped  him into his chair; ramandu stood behind him and laid both his hands on rhoops grey  head. even in daylight a faint silver light came from the hands of the star. there was a  smile on rhoops haggard face. he held out one of his hands to lucy and the other to  caspian. for a moment it looked as if he were going to say something. then his smile  brightened as if he were feeling) some delicious sensation, a long sigh of contentment came  from his lips, his head fell forward, and he slept.
"poor rhoop," said lucy. "i am glad. he must have had terrible times."   "dont lets even think of it," said eustace.
meanwhile caspians speech, helped perhaps by some magic of the island, was  having just the effect he intended. a good many who had been anxious enough to get  out of the voyage felt quite differently about being left out of it. and of course  whenever any one sailor announced that he had made up his mind to ask for permission to  sail, the ones who hadnt said this felt that they were getting fewer and more uncomfortable.  so that before the half-hour was nearly over several people were positively "sucking up"  to drinian and rhince (at least that was what they called it at my school) to get a good  report. and soon there were only three left who didnt want to go, and those three were  trying very hard to persuade others to stay with them. and very shortly after that there was  only one left.
and in they end he began to be afraid of being left behind all on his own  and changed his mind.
at the end of the half-hour they all came trooping back to aslans table  and stood at one end while drinian and rhince went and sat down with caspian and made their  report; and caspian accepted all the man but that one whod had changed his mind at  the last moment. his name was pittencream and he stayed on the island of the star  all the time the others were away looking for the worlds end, and he very much wished  he had gone with them. he wasnt the sort of man who could enjoy talking to ramandu and ramandus daughter (nor they to him), and it rained a good deal, and though  there was a wonderful feast on the table every night, he didnt very much enjoy it. he  said it gave him the creeps sitting there alone (and in the rain as likely as not) with  those four lords asleep at the end of the table. and when the others returned he felt so out  of things that he deserted on the voyage home at the lone islands, and went and lived in  calormen, where he told wonderful stories about his adventures at the end of the  world, until at last he came to believe them himself. so you may say, in a sense, that he lived  happily ever after. but he could never bear mice.
that night they all ate and drank together at the great table between the  pillars where the feast was magically renewed: and next morning the dawn treader set sail  once more just when the great birds had come and gone again.
"lady," said caspian, "i hope to speak with you again when i have broken  the enchantments." and ramandus daughter looked at him and smiled.





CHAPTER FIFTEEN

［小.说.t.xt＾天）堂）
the wonders of the last sea  very soon after they had left ramandus country they began to feel that  they had already sailed beyond the world. all was different. for one thing they all  found that they were needing less sleep. one did not want to go to bed. nor to eat much,  nor even to talk except in low voices. another thing was the light. there was too much of  it. the sun when it came up each morning looked twice, if not; three times, its usual  size. and every morning (which gave lucy the strangest feeling of all) the huge white  birds, singing their song with human voices in a language no one knew, streamed overhead and  vanished astern on their way to their breakfast at aslans table. a little later  they came flying back and vanished into the east.
"how beautifully clear the water is!" said lucy to herself, as she leaned  over the port side early in the afternoon of the second day.
and it was. the first thing that she noticed was a little black object,  about the size of a shoe, travelling along at the same speed as the ship. for a moment she  thought it was something floating on the surface. but then there came floating past a bit  of stale bread which the cook had just thrown out of the galley. and the bit of bread  looked as if it were going to collide with the black thing, but it didnt. it passed above it,  and lucy now saw that the black thing could not be on the surface. then the black thing  suddenly got very much bigger and flicked back to normal size a moment later.
now lucy knew she had seen something just like that happen somewhere else -  if only she could remember where. she held her hand to her head and screwed up her  face and put out her tongue in the effort to remember. at last she did. of course!  it was like what you saw from a train on a bright sunny day. you saw the black shadow of  your own coach running along the fields at the same pace as the train. then you went  into a cutting; and immediately the same shadow flicked close up to you and got big, racing  :long the grass of the cutting-bank. then you came out of the cutting and - pick! -  once more the black shadow had gone back to its normal size and was running along the  fields.
"its our shadow! - the shadow of the dawn treader," said lucy. "our shadow  running along on the bottom of the sea. that time when it got bigger it went over a  hill. but in that case the water must be clearer than i thought! good gracious, i must  he seeing the bottom of the sea; fathoms and fathoms down.”
as soon as she had said this she realized that the great silvery expanse  which she had been seeing (without noticing) for some time was really the sand on the  sea-bed and that ail sorts of darker or brighter patches were not lights and shadows on the  surface but real things on the bottom. at present, for instance, they were passing over a  mass of soft purply green with a broad, winding strip of pale grey in the middle of it  but now that she knew it was on the bottom she saw it much better. she could see that bits  of the dark stuff were much higher than other bits and were waving gently. "just like trees  in a wind," said lucy. "and do believe thats what they are. its a submarine forest.”
they passed on above it and presently the pale streak was joined by another  pale streak.
"if i was down there," thought lucy, "that streak would be just like a road  through the wood. and that place where it joins the other would be a crossroads. oh, i  do wish i was.
hallo! the forest is coming to an end. and i do believe the streak really  was a road! i can still see it going on across the open sand. its a different colour. and  its marked out with something at the edges - dotted lines. perhaps they are stones. and now  its getting wider.”
but it was not really getting wider, it was getting nearer. she realized  this because of the way in which the shadow of the ship came rushing up towards her. and the  road she felt sure it was a road now - began to go in zigzags. obviously it was climbing  up a steep hill.
and when she held her head sideways and looked back, what she saw was very  like what you see when you look down a winding road from the top of a hill. she could  even see the shafts of sunlight falling through the deep water on to the wooded  valley - and, in the  
extreme distance, everything melting away into a dim greenness. but some  places - the sunny ones, she thought - were ultramarine blue.
she could not, however, spend much time looking back; what was coming into  view in the forward direction was too exciting. the road had apparently now reached  the top of the hill and ran straight forward. little specks were moving to and fro on  it. and now something most wonderful, fortunately in full sunlight - or as full as it  can be when it falls through fathoms of water - flashed into sight. it was knobbly and  jagged and of a pearly, or perhaps an ivory, colour. she was so nearly straight above it  that at first she could hardly make out what it was. but everything became plain when she  noticed its shadow. the sunlight was falling across lucys shoulders, so the shadow of  the thing lay stretched out on the sand behind it. and by its shape she saw clearly that  it was a shadow of towers and pinnacles, minarets and domes.
"why! - its a city or a huge castle," said lucy to herself "but i wonder  why theyve built it on top of a high mountain?”
long afterwards when she was back in england and talked all these  adventures over with edmund, they thought of a reason and i am pretty sure it is the true one.  in the sea, the deeper you go, the darker and colder it gets, and it is down there, in the  dark and cold, that dangerous things live - the squid and the sea serpent and the kraken.  the valleys are the wild, unfriendly places. the sea-people feel about their valleys as we  do about mountains, and feel about their mountains as we feel about valleys. it is  on the heights (or, as we would say, "in the shallows") that there is warmth and peace.  the reckless hunters and brave knights of the sea go down into the depths on quests and  adventures, but return home to the heights for rest and peace, courtesy and council,  the sports, the dances and the songs.
they had passed the city and the sea-bed was still rising. it was only a  few hundred feet below the ship now. the road had disappeared. they were sailing above an  open park-like country, dotted with little groves of brightlycoloured vegetation. and  then - lucy nearly squealed aloud with excitement-she had seen people.
there were between fifteen and twenty of them, and all mounted on sea- horses - not the tiny little sea-horses which you may have seen in museums but horses rather  bigger than themselves. they must be noble and lordly people, lucy thought, for she  could catch the gleam of gold on some of their foreheads and streamers of emerald- or  orange-coloured stuff fluttered from their shoulders in the current. then:  "oh, bother these fish!" said lucy, for a whole shoal of small fat fish,  swimming quite close to the surface, had come between her and the sea people. but though  this spoiled her view it led to the most interesting thing of all.
suddenly a fierce little fish of a kind she had never seen before came  darting up from below, snapped, grabbed, and sank rapidly with one of the fat fish in its  mouth. and all the sea people were sitting on their horses staring up at what had  happened. they seemed  
to be talking and laughing. and before the hunting fish had got back to  them with its prey, another of the same kind came up from the sea people. and lucy was  almost certain that one big sea man who sat on his sea-horse in the middle of the  party had sent it or released it; as if he had been holdng it back till then in his hand  or on his wrist.
"why, i do declare," said lucy, "its a hunting party. or more like a  hawking party. yes, thats it. they ride out with these little fierce fish on their wrists just  as we used to ride out with falcons on our wrists when we were kings and queens at cair  paravel long ago.
and then they fly them - or i suppose i should say swim them - at the  others.”
she stopped suddenly because the scene was changing. the sea people had  noticed the dawn treader. the shoal of fish hard scattered in every direction: the  people themselves were coming up to find out the meaning of this big, black thing which had  come between them and the sun. and now they were so close to the surface that if they  had been in air, instead of water, lucy could have spoken to them. there were men and women  both. all wore coronets of some kind and many had chains of pearls. they wore no  other clothes.
their bodies were the colour of old ivory, their hair dark purple. the king  in the centre (no one could mistake him for anything but the king) looked proudly and  fiercely into lucys face and shook a spear in his hand. his knights did the same. the  faces of the ladies were filled with astonishment. lucy felt sure they had never seen a  ship or a human before - and how should they, in seas beyond the worlds end where no  ship ever came?
"what are you staring at, lu?" said a voice close beside her.
lucy had been so absorbed in what she was seeing that she started at the  sound, and when she turned she found that her arm had gone "dead" from leaning so long on  the rail in one position. drinian and edmund were beside her.
"look," she said.
they both looked, but almost at once drinian said in a low voice:  "turn round at once, your majesties - thats right, with our backs to the  sea. and dont look as if we were talking about anything important.”
"why, whats the matter?" said lucy as she obeyed.
"itll never do for the sailors to see all that," said drinian. "well have  men falling in love with a seawoman, or falling in love with the under-sea country itself, and  jumping overboard. ive heard of that kind of thing happening before in strange  seas. its always unlucky to see these people.”
"but we used to know them," said lucy. "in the old days at cair paravel  when my brother peter was high king. they came to the surface and sang at our  coronation.”
"i think that must have been a different kind, lu," said edmund. "they  could live in the air as well as under water. i rather think these cant. by the look of them  theyd have surfaced and started attacking us long ago if they could. they seem very  fierce.”
"at any rate," said drinian, but at that moment two sounds were heard. one  was a plop.
the other was a voice from the fighting top shouting, "man overboard!" then  everyone was busy. some of the sailors hurried aloft to take in the sail: others  hurried below to get to the oars; and rhince, who was on duty on the poop, began to put the helm  hard over so as to come round and back to the man who had gone overboard. but by now  everyone knew that it wasnt strictly a man. it was reepicheep.
"drat that mouse!" said drinian. "its more trouble than all the rest of  the ships company put together. if there is any scrape to be got into, in it will get! it  ought to be put in irons - keel-hauled - marooned - have its whiskers cut off. can anyone see the  little blighter?”
all this didnt mean that drinian really disliked reepicheep. on the  contrary he liked him very much and was therefore frightened about him, and being frightened put  him in a bad temper - just as your mother is much angrier with you for running out into  the road in front of a car than a stranger would be. no one, of course, was afraid of  reepicheeps drowning, for he was an excellent swimmer; but the three who knew what was  going on below the water were afraid of those long, cruel spears in the hands of the  sea people.
in a few minutes the dawn treader had come round and everyone could see the  black blob in the water which was reepicheep. he was chattering with the greatest  excitement but as his mouth kept on getting filled with water nobody could understand  what he was saying.
"hell blurt the whole thing out if we dont shut him up," cried drinian.  to prevent this he rushed to the side and lowered a rope himself, shouting to the sailors,  "all right, all right.
back to your places. i hope i can heave a mouse up without help." and as  reepicheep began climbing up the rope not very nimbly because his wet fur made him  heavy - drinian leaned over and whispered to him,  "dont tell. not a word.”
but when the dripping mouse had reached the deck it turned out not to be at  all interested in the sea people.
"sweet!" he cheeped. "sweet, sweet!”
"what are you talking about?" asked drinian crossly. "and you neednt shake  yourself all over me, either.”
"i tell you the waters sweet," said the mouse. "sweet, fresh. it isnt  salt.”
for a moment no one quite took in the importance of this. but then  reepicheep once more repeated the old prophecy:  "where the waves grow sweet, doubt not, reepicheep, there is the utter  east.”
then at last everyone understood.
"let me have a bucket, rynelf," said drinian.
it was handed him and he lowered it and up it came again. the water shone  in it like glass.
"perhaps your majesty would like to taste it first," said drinian to  caspian.
the king took the bucket in both hands, raised it to his lips, sipped, then  drank deeply and raised his head. his face was changed. not only his eyes but everything  about him seemed to be brighter.
"yes," he said, "it is sweet. thats real water, that. im not sure that it  isnt going to kill me. but it is the death i would have chosen - if id known about it till  now.”
"what do you mean?" asked edmund.
"it - its like light more than anything else," said caspian.
"that is what it is," said reepicheep. "drinkable light. we must be very  near the end of the world now.”
there was a moments silence and then lucy knelt down on the deck and drank  from the bucket.
"its the loveliest thing i have ever tasted," she said with a kind of  gasp. "but oh - its strong. we shant need to eat anything now.”
and one by one everybody on board drank. and for a long time they were all  silent. they felt almost too well and strong to bear it; and presently they began to  notice another result. as i have said before, there had been too much light ever since  they left the island of ramandu - the sun too large (though not too hot), the sea too bright,  the air too shining. now, the light grew no less - if anything, it increased - but they  could bear it.
they could look straight up at the sun without blinking. they could see  more light than they had ever seen before. and the deck and the sail and their own faces  and bodies became brighter and brighter and every rope shone. and next morning, when  the sun rose, now five or six times its old size, they stared hard into it and  could see the very feathers of the birds that came flying from it.
hardly a word was spoken on board all that day, till about dinner-time (no  one wanted any dinner, the water was enough for them) drinian said:  "i cant understand this. there is not a breath of wind. the sail hangs  dead. the sea is as flat as a pond. and yet we drive on as fast as if there were a gale behind  us.”
"ive been thinking that, too," said caspian. "we must be caught in some  strong current.”
"hm," said edmund. "thats not so nice if the world really has an edge and  were getting near it.”
"you mean," said caspian, "that we might be just well, poured over it?”
"yes, yes," cried reepicheep, clapping his paws together. "thats how ive  always imagined it - the world like a great round table and the waters of all the  oceans endlessly pouring over the edge. the ship will tip up stand on her head - for one  moment we shall see over the edge - and then, down, down, the rush, the speed -”
"and what do you think will be waiting for us at the bottom, eh?" said  drinian.
"aslans country perhaps," said the mouse, its eyes shining. "or perhaps  there isnt any bottom. perhaps it goes down for ever and ever. but whatever it is, wont  it be worth anything just to have looked for one moment beyond the edge of the world.”
"but look -here," said eustace, "this is all rot. the worlds round - i  mean, round like a ball, not like a table.”
"our world is," said edmund. "but is this?”
"do you mean to say," asked caspian, "that you three come from a round  world (round like a ball) and youve never told me! its really too bad of you. because  we have fairy-tales in which there are round worlds and i always loved them. i never  believed there were any real ones. but ive always wished there were and ive always  longed to live in one. oh, id give anything - i wonder why you can get into our world and we  never get into yours? if only i had the chance! it must be exciting to live on a  thing like a ball.
have you ever been to the parts where people walk about upside-down?”
edmund shook his head. "and it isnt like that," he added. "theres nothing  particularly exciting about a round world when youre there.

 



CHAPTER SIXTEEN

小，说，t，xt，天，堂
the very end of the world  
reepicheep was the only person on board besides drinian and the two  pevensies who had noticed the sea people. he had dived in at once when he saw the sea  king shaking his spear, for he regarded this as a sort of threat or challenge and wanted  to have the matter out there and then. the excitement of discovering that the water was  now fresh had distracted his attention, and before he remembered the sea people again  lucy and drinian had taken him aside and warned him not to mention what he had seen.
as things turned out they need hardly have bothered, for by this time the  dawn treader was gliding over a part of the sea which seemed to be uninhabited. no one  except lucy saw anything more of the people, and even she had only one short glimpse.  all morning on the following day they sailed in fairly shallow water and the bottom was  weedy. just before midday lucy saw a large shoal of fishes grazing on the weed. they  were all eating steadily and all moving in the same direction. "just like a flock of  sheep," thought lucy.
suddenly she saw a little sea girl of about her own age in the middle of  them - a quiet, lonely-looking girl with a sort of crook in her hand. lucy felt sure that  this girl must be a shepherdess - or perhaps a fish-herdess and that the shoal was really a  flock at pasture.
both the fishes and the girl were quite close to the surface. and just as  the girl, gliding in the shallow water, and lucy, leaning over the bulwark, came opposite to one  another, the girl looked up and stared straight into lucys face. neither could speak to  the other and in a moment the sea girl dropped astern. but lucy will never forget her face.  it did not look frightened or angry like those of the other sea people. lucy had liked that  girl and she felt certain the girl had liked her. in that one moment they had somehow  become friends.
there does not seem to be much chance of their meeting again in that world  or any other.
but if ever they do they will rush together with their hands held out.
after that for many days, without wind in her shrouds or foam at her bows,  across a waveless sea, the dawn treader glided smoothly east. every day and every  hour the light became more brilliant and still they could bear it. no one ate or slept and  no one wanted to, but they drew buckets of dazzling water from the sea, stronger than  wine and somehow wetter, more liquid, than ordinary water, and pledged one another  silently in deep draughts of it. and one or two of the sailors who had been oldish men  when the voyage began now grew younger every day. everyone on board was filled with  joy and excitement, but not an excitement that made one talk. the further they  sailed the less they spoke, and then almost in a whisper. the stillness of that last sea laid  hold on them.
"my lord," said caspian to drinian one day, "what do you see ahead?”
"sire," said drinian, "i see whiteness. all along the horizon from north to  south, as far as my eyes can reach.”
"that is what i see too," said caspian, "and i cannot imagine what it is.”
"if we were in higher latitudes, your majesty," said drinian, "i would say  it was ice. but it cant be that; not here. all the same, wed better get men to the oars  and hold the ship  
back against the current. whatever the stuff is, we dont want to crash  into it at this speed!”
they did as drinian said, and so continued to go slower and slower. the  whiteness did not get any less mysterious as they- approached it. if it was land it must  be a very strange land, for it seemed just as smooth as the water and on the same level with  it. when they got very close to it drinian put the helm hard over and turned the dawn  treader south so that she was broadside on to the current and rowed a little way southward  along the edge of the whiteness. in so doing they accidentally made the important  discovery that the current was only about forty feet wide and the rest of the sea as still as  a pond. this was good news for the crew, who had already begun to think that the return  journey to ramandus land, rowing against stream all the way, would be pretty poor  sport. (it also explained why the shepherd girl had dropped so quickly astern. she was not  in the current. if she had been she would have been moving east at the same speed  as the ship.)
and still no one could make out what the white stuff was. then the boat was  lowered and it put off to investigate. those who remained on the dawn treader could see  that the boat pushed right in amidst the whiteness. then they could hear the voices of  the party in the boat clear across the still water) talking in a shrill and surprised way.  then there was a pause while rynelf in the bows of the boat took a sounding; and when, after  that, the boat came rowing back there seemed to be plenty of the white stuff inside her.  everyone crowded to the side to hear the news.
"lilies, your majesty!" shouted rynelf, standing up in the bows.
"what did you say?" asked caspian.
"blooming lilies, your majesty," said rynelf. "same as in a pool or in a  garden at home.”
"look!" said lucy, who was in the stern of the boat. she held up her wet  arms full of white petals and broad flat leaves.
"whats the depth, rynelf?" asked drinian.
"thats the funny thing, captain," said rynelf. "its still deep. three and  a half fathoms clear.”
"they cant be real lilies - not what we call lilies," said eustace.
probably they were not, but they were very like them. and when, after some  consultation, the dawn treader turned back into the current and began to glide eastward  through the lily lake or the silver sea (they tried both these names but it was the  silver sea that stuck and is now on caspians map) the strangest part of their travels  began. very soon the open sea which they were leaving was only a thin rim of blue on the  western horizon.
whiteness, shot with faintest colour of gold, spread round them on every  side, except just astern where their passage had thrust the lilies apart and left an open  lane of water that  
shone like dark green glass. to look at, this last sea was very like the  arctic; and if their eyes had not by now grown as strong as eagles the sun on all that  whiteness - especially at early morning when the sun was hugest would have been unbearable. and  every evening the same whiteness made the daylight last longer. there seemed no  end to the lilies. day after day from all those miles and leagues of flowers there  rose a smell which lucy found it very hard to describe; sweet - yes, but not at all sleepy or  overpowering, a fresh, wild, lonely smell that seemed to get into your brain and make you  feel that you could go up mountains at a run or wrestle with an elephant. she and caspian  said to one another, "i feel that i cant stand much more of this, yet i dont want it  to stop.”
they took soundings very often but it was only several days later that the  water became shallower. after that it went on getting shallower. there came a day when  they had to row out of the current and feel their way forward at a snails pace,  rowing. and soon it was clear that the dawn treader could sail no further east. indeed it was  only by very clever handling that they saved her from grounding.
"lower the boat," cried caspian, "and then call the men aft. i must speak  to them.”
"whats he going to do?" whispered eustace to edmund. "theres a queer look  in his eyes.”
"i think we probably all look the same," said edmund.
they joined caspian on the poop and soon all the men were crowded together  at the foot of the ladder to hear the kings speech. "friends," said caspian, "we have  now fulfilled the quest on which you embarked. the seven lords are all accounted for and  as sir reepicheep has sworn never to return, when you reach ramandus land you  will doubtless find the lords revilian and argoz and mavramorn awake. to you, my  lord drinian, i entrust this ship, bidding you sail to narnia with all the speed  you may, and above all not to land on the island of deathwater. and instruct my regent,  the dwarf trumpkin, to give to all these, my shipmates, the rewards i promised them.  they have been earned well. and if i come not again it is my will that the regent,  and master cornelius, and trufflehunter the badger, and the lord drinian choose a king  of narnia with the consent-”
"but, sire," interrupted drinian, "are you abdicating?”
"i am going with reepicheep to see the worlds end," said caspian.
a low murmur of dismay ran through the sailors.
"we will take the boat," said caspian. "you will have no need of it in  these gentle seas and you must build a new one in ramandus island. and now-”
"caspian," said edmund suddenly and sternly, "you cant do this.”
"most certainly," said reepicheep, "his majesty cannot.”
"no indeed," said drinian.
"cant?" said caspian sharply, looking for a moment not unlike his uncle  miraz.
"begging your majestys pardon," said rynelf from the deck below, "but if  one of us did the same it would be called deserting.”
"you presume too much on your long service, rynelf," said caspian.
"no, sire! hes perfectly right," said drinian.
"by the mane of aslan," said caspian, "i had thought you were all my  subjects here, not my schoolmasters.”
"im not," said edmund, "and i say you can not do this.”
"cant again," said caspian. "what do you mean?”
"if it please your majesty, we mean shall not," said reepicheep with a very  low bow.
"you are the king of narnia. you break faith with all your subjects, and  especially with trumpkin, if you do not return. you shall not please yourself with  adventures as if you were a private person. and if your majesty will not hear reason it will be  the truest loyalty of every man on board to follow me in disarming and binding you  till you come to your senses.”
"quite right," said edmund. "like they did with ulysses when he wanted to  go near the sirens.”
caspians hand had gone to his sword hilt, when lucy said, "and youve  almost promised ramandus daughter to go back.”
caspian paused. "well, yes. there is that," he said. he stood irresolute  for a moment and then shouted out to the ship in general.
"well, have your way. the quest is ended. we all return. get the boat up  again.”
"sire," said reepicheep, "we do not all return. i, as i explained before -”
"silence!" thundered caspian. "ive been lessoned but ill not be baited.  will no one silence that mouse?”
"your majesty promised," said reepicheep, "to be good lord to the talking  beasts of narnia.”
"talking beasts, yes," said caspian. "i said nothing about beasts that  never stop talking.”
and he flung down the ladder in a temper and went into the cabin, slamming  the door.
but when the others rejoined him a little later they found him changed; he  was white and there were tears in his eyes.
"its no good," he said. "i might as well have behaved decently for all the  good i did with my temper and swagger. aslan has spoken to me. no - i dont mean he was  actually here.
he wouldnt fit into the cabin, for one thing. but that gold lions head on  the wall came to life and spoke to me. it was terrible his eyes. not that he was at all  rough with me - only a bit stern at first. but it was terrible all the same. and he said - he said  - oh, i cant bear it.
the worst thing he could have said. youre to go on - reep and edmund, and  lucy, and eustace; and im to go back. alone. and at once. and what is the good of  anything?”
"caspian, dear," said lucy. "you knew wed have to go back to our own world  sooner or later.”
"yes," said caspian with a sob, "but this is sooner.”
"youll feel better when you get back to ramandus island," said lucy.
he cheered up a little later on, but it was a grievous parting oo both  sides and i will not dwell on it. about two oclock in the afternoon, well victualled and  watered (though they thought they would need neither food nor drink) and with reepicheeps  coracle on board, the boat pulled away from the dawn treader to row through the endless  carpet of lilies.
the dawn trader flew all her flags and hung out her shields to honour their  departure.
tall and big and homelike she looked from their low position with the  lilies all round them. and before she was out of sight they saw her turn and begin rowing  slowly westward. yet though lucy shed a few tears, she could not feel it as much  as you might have expected. the light, the silence, the tingling smell of the silver  sea, even (in some odd way) the loneliness itself, were too exciting.
there was no need to row, for the current drifted them steadily to the  east. none of them slept or ate. all that night and all next day they glided eastward, and  when the third day dawned - with a brightness you or i could not bear even if we had dark  glasses on - they saw a wonder ahead. it was as if a wall stood up between them and the sky,  a greenish-grey, trembling, shimmering wall. then up came the sun, and at its first  rising they saw it through the wall and it turned into wonderful rainbow colours. then they  knew that the wall was really a long, tall wave - a wave endlessly fixed in one place as  you may often see at the edge of a waterfall. it seemed to be about thirty feet high, and  the current was gliding them swiftly towards it. you might have supposed they would have  thought of their danger. they didnt. i dont think anyone could have in their  position. for now they saw something not only behind the wave but behind the sun. they could not  have seen even the sun if their eyes had not been strengthened by the water of the  last sea. but now they could look at the rising sun and see it clearly and see things  beyond it. what they saw - eastward, beyond the sun - was a range of mountains. it was so  high that either  
they never saw the top of it or they forgot it. none of them remembers  seeing any sky in that direction. and the mountains must really have been outside the world.  for any mountains even a quarter of a twentieth of that height ought to have had  ice and snow on them. but these were warm and green and full, of forests and waterfalls  however high you looked. and suddenly there came a breeze from the east, tossing the top  of the wave into foamy shapes and ruffling the smooth water all round them. it lasted  only a second or so but what it brought them in that second none of those three children  will ever forget.
it brought both a smell and a sound, a musical sound edmund and eustace  would never talk about it afterwards. lucy could only say, "it would break your heart."  "why," said i, "was it so sad: " "sad!! no," said lucy.
no one in that boat doubted chat they were seeing beyond the end of the  world into aslans country.
at that moment, with a crunch, the boat ran aground. the water was too  shallow now for it. "this," said reepicheep, "is where i go on alone.”
they did not even try to stop dim, for everything now felt as if it had  been fated or had happened before. they helped him to lower his little coracle. then he took  off his sword ("i shall need it no more," he said) and flung it far away across the idled  sea. where it fell it stood upright with the hilt above the surface. then he bade them goodbye  trying to be sad for their sakes but he was quivering with happiness. lucy, for the  first and last time, did what she had always wanted to do, taking him in her arms and caressing  him. then hastily he got into his coracle and took his paddle, and the current caught  it and away he went, very black against the lilies. but no lilies grew on the wave; it was  a smooth green slope. the coracle went more and more quickly, and beautifully it rushed up  the waves side. for one split second they saw its shape and reepicheeps on the very  top. then it vanished, and since that moment no one can truly claim to have seen  reepicheep the mouse. but my belief is that he came safe to aslans country and is alive  there to this day.
as the sun rose the sight of those mountains outside the world faded away.  the wave remained but there was only blue sky behind it.
the children got out of the boat and waded - not towards the wave but  southward with the wall of water on their left. they could not have told you why they did  this; it was their fate. and though they had felt - and been very grown-up on the dawn  treader, they now felt just the opposite and held hands as they waded through the lilies.  they never felt tired. the water was warm and all the time it got shallower. at last they  were on dry sand, and then on grass - a huge plain of very fine short grass, almost  level with the silver sea and spreading in every direction without so much as a molehill.
and of course, as it always does in a perfectly flat place without trees,  it looked as if the sky came down to meet the grass in front of them. but as they went on they  got the strangest impression that here at last the sky did really come down and  join the earth - a  
blue wall, very bright, but real and solid: more like glass than anything  else. and soon they were quite sure of it. it was very near now.
but between them and the foot of the sky there was something so white on  the green grass that even with their eagles eyes they could hardly look at it. they  came on and saw that it was a lamb.
"come and have breakfast," said the lamb in its sweet milky voice.
then they noticed for the first time that there was a fire lit on the grass  and fish roasting on it. they sat down and ate the fish, hungry now for the first time for  many days. and it was the most delicious food they had ever tasted.
"please, lamb," said lucy, "is this the way to aslans country?”
"not for you," said the lamb. "for you the door into aslans country is  from your own world.”
"what!" said edmund. "is there a way into aslans country from our world  too?”
"there is a way into my country from all the worlds," said the lamb; but as  he spoke his snowy white flushed into tawny gold and his size changed and he was aslan  himself, towering above them and scattering light from his mane.
"oh, aslan," said lucy. "will you tell us how to get into your country from  our world?”
"i shall be telling you all the time," said aslan. "but i will not tell you  how long or short the way will be; only that it lies across a river. but do not fear that,  for i am the great bridge builder. and now come; i will open the door in the sky and send you  to your own land.”
"please, aslan," said lucy. "before we go, will you tell us when we can  come back to narnia again? please. and oh, do, do, do make it soon."   "dearest," said aslan very gently, "you and your brother will never come  balk to narnia.”
"oh, aslan!!" said edmund and lucy both together in despairing voices.
"you are too old, children," said aslan, "and you must begin to come close  to your own world now.”
"it isnt narnia, you know," sobbed lucy. "its you. we shant meet you  there. and how can we live, never meeting you?”
"but you shall meet me, dear one," said aslan.
"are are you there too, sir?" said edmund.
"i am," said aslan. "but there i have another name. you must learn to know  me by that name. this was the very reason why you were brought to narnia, that by  knowing me here for a little, you may know me better there.”
"and is eustace never to come back here either?" said lucy.
"child," said aslan, "do you really need to know that? come, i am opening  the door in the sky." then all in one moment there was a rending of the blue wall (like  a curtain being torn) and a terrible white light from beyond the sky, and the feel of  aslans mane and a lions kiss on their foreheads and then - the bark bedroom in aunt  albertas home in cambridge.
only two more things need to be told. one is that caspian and his men all  came safely back to ramandus island. and the three lords woke from their sleep.  caspian married ramandus daughter and they all reached narnia in the end, and she became a  great queen and the mother and grandmother of great kings. the other is that back in  our own world everyone soon started saying how eustace had improved, and how "youd never  know him for the same boy": everyone except aunt alberta, who said he had become  very commonplace and tiresome and it must have been the influence of those  pevensie children.



 