《The Horse and His Boy》查看《The Horse and His Boy》书评和最新更新以及相关书籍推荐请到《The Horse and His Boy》专题网址http://www.xiabook.com/waiguo/2125/ 
  



CHAPTER ONE

小，说，t，xt，天，堂
how shasta set out on his travels  this is the story of an adventure that happened in narnia and calormen and  the lands between, in the golden age when peter was high king in narnia and his  brother and his two sisters were king and queens under him.
in those days, far south in calormen on a little creek of the sea, there  lived a poor fisherman called arsheesh, and with him there lived a boy who called him  father. the boys name was shasta. on most days arsheesh went out in his boat to fish  in the morning, and in the afternoon he harnessed his donkey to a cart and loaded  the cart with fish and went a mile or so southward to the village to sell it. if it had  sold well he would come home in a moderately good temper and say nothing to shasta, but if it  had sold badly he would find fault with him and perhaps beat him. there was always  something to find fault with for shasta had plenty of work to do, mending and washing  the nets, cooking the supper, and cleaning the cottage in which they both lived.
shasta was not at all interested in anything that lay south of his home  because he had once or twice been to the village with arsheesh and he knew that there was  nothing very interesting there. in the village he only met other men who were just like  his father - men with long, dirty robes, and wooden shoes turned up at the toe, and turbans  on their heads, and beards, talking to one another very slowly about things that sounded  dull. but he was very interested in everything that lay to the north because no one ever  went that way and he was never allowed to go there himself. when he was sitting out of doors  mending the nets, and all alone, he would often look eagerly to the north. one could  see nothing but a grassy slope running up to a level ridge and beyond that the sky with  perhaps a few birds in it.
sometimes if arsheesh was there shasta would say, "o my father, what is  there beyond that hill?" and then if the fisherman was in a bad temper he would box  shastas ears and tell him to attend to his work. or if he was in a peaceable mood he would  say, "o my son, do not allow your mind to be distracted by idle questions. for one of the  poets has said, `application to business is the root of prosperity, but those who ask  questions that do not concern them are steering the ship of folly towards the rock of  indigence.”
shasta thought that beyond the hill there must be some delightful secret  which his father wished to hide from him. in reality, however, the fisherman talked like  this because he didnt know what lay to the north. neither did he care. he had a very  practical mind.
one day there came from the south a stranger who was unlike any man that  shasta had seen before. he rode upon a strong dappled horse with flowing mane and tail  and his stirrups and bridle were inlaid with silver. the spike of a helmet  projected from the middle of his silken turban and he wore a shirt of chain mail. by his side  hung a curving scimitar, a round shield studded with bosses of brass hung at his back, and  his right hand grasped a lance. his face was dark, but this did not surprise shasta  because all the people of calormen are like that; what did surprise him was the mans beard which  was dyed crimson, and curled and gleaming with scented oil. but arsheesh knew by the  gold on the strangers bare arm that he was a tarkaan or great lord, and he bowed  kneeling before him till his beard touched the earth and made signs to shasta to kneel  also.
the stranger demanded hospitality for the night which of course the  fisherman dared not refuse. all the best they had was set before the tarkaan for supper (and he  didnt think much of it) and shasta, as always happened when the fisherman had company,  was given a hunk of bread and turned out of the cottage. on these occasions he  usually slept with the donkey in its little thatched stable. but it was much too early to go  to sleep yet, and shasta, who had never learned that it is wrong to listen behind doors, sat  down with his ear to a crack in the wooden wall of the cottage to hear what the grown-ups  were talking about. and this is what he heard.
"and now, o my host," said the tarkaan, "i have a mind to buy that boy of  yours.”
"o my master," replied the fisherman (and shasta knew by the wheedling tone  the greedy look that was probably coming into his face as he said it), "what price  could induce your servant, poor though he is, to sell into slavery his only child and his own  flesh? has not one of the poets said, `natural affection is stronger than soup and  offspring more precious than carbuncles?"  "it is even so," replied the guest dryly. "but another poet has likewise  said, "he who attempts to deceive the judicious is already baring his own back for the  scourge." do not load your aged mouth with falsehoods. this boy is manifestly no son of  yours, for your cheek is as dark as mine but the boy is fair and white like the accursed  but beautiful barbarians who inhabit the remote north.”
"how well it was said," answered the fisherman, "that swords can be kept  off with shields but the eye of wisdom pierces through every defence! know then, o  my formidable guest, that because of my extreme poverty i have never married  and have no child. but in that same year in which the tisroc (may he live for ever)  began his august and beneficent reign, on a night when the moon was at her full, it pleased  the gods to deprive me of my sleep. therefore i arose from my bed in this hovel and  went forth to the beach to refresh myself with looking upon the water and the moon and  breathing the cool air. and presently i heard a noise as of oars coming to me across the water  and then, as it  
were, a weak cry. and shortly after, the tide brought to the land a little  boat in which there was nothing but a man lean with extreme hunger and thirst who seemed  to have died but a few moments before (for he was still warm), and an empty water- skin, and a child, still living. "doubtless," said i, "these unfortunates have escaped  from the wreck of a great ship, but by the admirable designs of the gods, the elder has  starved himself to keep the child alive and has perished in sight of land." accordingly,  remembering how the gods never fail to reward those who befriend the destitute, and being  moved by compassion (for your servant is a man of tender heart) -”
"leave out all these idle words in your own praise," interrupted the  tarkaan. "it is enough to know that you took the child - and have had ten times the worth  of his daily bread out of him in labour, as anyone can see. and now tell me at once what  price you put on him, for i am wearied with your loquacity.”
"you yourself have wisely said," answered arsheesh, "that the boys labour  has been to me of inestimable value. this must be taken into account in fixing the  price. for if i sell the boy i must undoubtedly either buy or hire another to do his work.”
"ill give you fifteen crescents for him," said the tarkaan.
"fifteen!" cried arsheesh in a voice that was something between a whine and  a scream.
"fifteen! for the prop of my old age and the delight of my eyes! do not  mock my grey beard, tarkaan though you be. my price is seventy.”
at this point shasta got up and tiptoed away. he had heard all he wanted,  for he had open listened when men were bargaining in the village and knew how it was done.  he was quite certain that arsheesh would sell him in the end for something much  more than fifteen crescents and much less than seventy, but that he and the tarkaan  would take hours in getting to an agreement.
you must not imagine that shasta felt at all as you and i would feel if we  had just overheard our parents talking about selling us for slaves. for one thing,  his life was already little better than slavery; for all he knew, the lordly stranger on  the great horse might be kinder to him than arsheesh. for another, the story about his own  discovery in the boat had filled him with excitement and with a sense of relief. he had  often been uneasy because, try as he might, he had never been able to love the  fisherman, and he knew that a boy ought to love his father. and now, apparently, he was no  relation to arsheesh at all. that took a great weight off his mind. "why, i might be  anyone!" he thought. "i might be the son of a tarkaan myself - or the son of the tisroc  (may he live for ever) or of a god!”
he was standing out in the grassy place before the cottage while he thought  these things.
twilight was coming on apace and a star or two was already out, but the  remains of the sunset could still be seen in the west. not far away the strangers horse,  loosely tied to an iron ring in the wall of the donkeys stable, was grazing. shasta strolled  over to it and patted its neck. it went on tearing up the grass and took no notice of him.
then another thought came into shastas mind. "i wonder what sort of a man  that tarkaan is," he said out loud. "it would be splendid if he was kind. some of the  slaves in a great lords house have next to nothing to do. they wear lovely clothes and eat  meat every day.
perhaps hed take me to the wars and id save his life in a battle and then  hed set me free and adopt me as his son and give me a palace and a chariot and a suit of  armour. but then he might be a horrid cruel man. he might send me to work on the fields in  chains. i wish i knew. how can i know? i bet this horse knows, if only he could tell me.”
the horse had lifted its head. shasta stroked its smooth-as-satin nose and  said, "i wish you could talk, old fellow.”
and then for a second he thought he was dreaming, for quite distinctly,  though in a low voice, the horse said, "but i can.”
shasta stared into its great eyes and his own grew almost as big, with  astonishment.
"how ever did you learn to talk?" he asked.
"hush! not so loud," replied the horse. "where i come from, nearly all the  animals talk.”
"wherever is that?" asked shasta.
"narnia," answered the horse. "the happy land of narnia - narnia of the  heathery mountains and the thymy downs, narnia of the many rivers, the plashing  glens, the mossy caverns and the deep forests ringing with the hammers of the dwarfs.  oh the sweet air of narnia! an hours life there is better than a thousand years  in calormen." it ended with a whinny that sounded very like a sigh.
"how did you get here?" said shasta.
"kidnapped," said the horse. "or stolen, or captured whichever you like to  call it. i was only a foal at the time. my mother warned me not to range the southern  slopes, into archenland and beyond, but i wouldnt heed her. and by the lions mane i  have paid for my folly. all these years i have been a slave to humans, hiding my true  nature and pretending to be dumb and witless like their horses.”
"why didnt you tell them who you were?”
"not such a fool, thats why. if theyd once found out i could talk they  would have made a show of me at fairs and guarded me more carefully than ever. my last chance  of escape would have been gone.”
"and why -" began shasta, but the horse interrupted him.
"now look," it said, "we mustnt waste time on idle questions. you want to  know about my master the tarkaan anradin. well, hes bad. not too bad to me, for a war  horse costs too much to be treated very badly. but youd better be lying dead tonight  than go to be a human slave in his house tomorrow.”
"then id better run away," said shasta, turning very pale.
"yes, you had," said the horse. "but why not run away with me?”
"are you going to run away too?" said shasta.
"yes, if youll come with me," answered the horse. "this is the chance for  both of us.
you see if i run away without a rider, everyone who sees me will say "stray  horse" and be after me as quick as he can. with a rider ive a chance to get through.  thats where you can help me. on the other hand, you cant get very far on those two silly  legs of yours (what absurd legs humans have!) without being overtaken. but on me you can outdistance any other horse in this country. thats where i can help you.  by the way, i suppose you know how to ride?”
"oh yes, of course," said shasta. "at least, ive ridden the donkey.”
"ridden the what?" retorted the horse with extreme contempt. (at least,  that is what he meant. actually it came out in a sort of neigh - "ridden the wha-ha-ha-ha- ha." talking horses always become more horsy in accent when they are angry.)
"in other words," it continued, "you cant ride. thats a drawback. ill  have to teach you as we go along. if you cant ride, can you fall?”
"i suppose anyone can fall," said shasta.
"1 mean can you fall and get up again without crying and mount again and  fall again and yet not be afraid of falling?”
"i - ill try," said shasta. "poor little beast," said the horse in a  gentler tone. "i forget youre only a foal. well make a fine rider of you in time. and now - we  mustnt start until those two in the but are asleep. meantime we can make our plans. my tarkaan  is on his way north to the great city, to tashbaan itself and the court of the tisroc  -”
"i say," put in shasta in rather a shocked voice, "oughtnt you to say `may  he live for ever?”
"why?" asked the horse. "im a free narnian. and why should i talk slaves  and fools talk? i dont want him to live for ever, and i know that hes not going to  live for ever whether i want him to or not. and i can see youre from the free north too.  no more of this southern jargon between you and me! and now, back to our plans. as i  said, my human was on his way north to tashbaan.”
"does that mean wed better go to the south?”
"i think not," said the horse. "you see, he thinks im dumb and witless  like his other horses. now if i really were, the moment i got loose id go back home to my  stable and paddock; back to his palace which is two days journey south. thats where  hell look for me. hed never dream of my going on north on my own. and anyway he will  probably think that someone in the last village who saw him ride through has  followed us to here and stolen me.”
"oh hurrah!" said shasta. "then well go north. ive been longing to go to  the north all my life.”
"of course you have," said the horse. "thats because of the blood thats  in you. im sure youre true northern stock. but not too loud. i should think theyd be  asleep soon now.”
"id better creep back and see," suggested shasta.
"thats a good idea," said the horse. "but take care youre not caught.”
it was a good deal darker now and very silent except for the sound of the  waves on the beach, which shasta hardly noticed because he had been hearing it day and  night as long as he could remember. the cottage, as he approached it, showed no light.  when he listened at the front there was no noise. when he went round to the only  window, he could hear, after a second or two, the familiar noise of the old  fishermans squeaky snore.
it was funny to think that if all went well he would never hear it again.  holding his breath and feeling a little bit sorry, but much less sorry than he was glad,  shasta glided away over the grass and went to the donkeys stable, groped along to a place he  knew where the key was hidden, opened the door and found the horses saddle and bridle  which had been locked up there for the night. he bent forward and kissed the donkeys  nose. "im sorry we cant take you," he said.
"there you are at last," said the horse when he got back to it. "i was  beginning to wonder what had become of you.”
"i was getting your things out of the stable," replied shasta. "and now,  can you tell me how to put them on?”
for the next few minutes shasta was at work, very cautiously to avoid  jingling, while the horse said things like, "get that girth a bit tighter," or "youll find a  buckle lower down,”
or "youll need to shorten those stirrups a good bit." when all was  finished it said:  "now; weve got to have reins for the look of the thing, but you wont be  using them. tie them to the saddle-bow: very slack so that i can do what i like with my  head. and, remember - you are not to touch them.”
"what are they for, then?" asked shasta.
"ordinarily they are for directing me," replied the horse. "but as i intend  to do all the directing on this journey, youll please keep your hands to yourself. and  theres another thing. im not going to have you grabbing my mane.”
"but i say," pleaded shasta. "if im not to hold on by the reins or by your  mane, what am i to hold on by?”
"you hold on with your knees," said the horse. "thats the secret of good  riding. grip my body between your knees as hard as you like; sit straight up, straight as a  poker; keep your elbows in. and by the way, what did you do with the spurs?”
"put them on my heels, of course," said shasta. "i do know that much.”
"then you can take them off and put them in the saddlebag. we may be able  to sell them when we get to tashbaan. ready? and now i think you can get up.”
"ooh! youre a dreadful height," gasped shasta after his first, and  unsuccessful, attempt.
"im a horse, thats all," was the reply. "anyone would think i was a  haystack from the way youre trying to climb up me! there, thats better. now sit up and  remember what i told you about your knees. funny to think of me who has led cavalry charges  and won races having a potato-sack like you in the saddle! however, off we go." it  chuckled, not unkindly.
and it certainly began their night journey with great caution. first of all  it went just south of the fishermans cottage to the little river which there ran into the  sea, and took care to leave in the mud some very plain hoof-marks pointing south. but as soon as  they were in the middle of the ford it turned upstream and waded till they were about a  hundred yards farther inland than the cottage. then it selected a nice gravelly bit of  bank which would take no footprints and came out on the northern side. then, still at a  walking pace, it went northward till the cottage, the one tree, the donkeys stable, and the  creek - everything, in fact, that shasta had ever known - had sunk out of sight in  the grey summer-night darkness. they had been going uphill and now were at the top  of the ridge - that ridge which had always been the boundary of shastas known world. he  could not see what was ahead except that it was all open and grassy. it looked  endless: wild and lonely and free.
"i say!" observed the horse. "what a place for a gallop, eh!”
"oh dont lets," said shasta. "not yet. i dont know how to - please,  horse. i dont know your name.”
"breehy-hinny-brinny-hooky-hah," said the horse.
"ill never be able to say that," said shasta. "can i call you bree?”
"well, if its the best you can do, i suppose you must," said the horse.  "and what shall i call you?”
"im called shasta.”
"hm," said bree. "well, now, theres a name thats really hard to  pronounce. but now about this gallop. its a good deal easier than trotting if you only knew,  because you dont have to rise and fall. grip with your knees and keep your eyes straight  ahead between my ears. dont look at the ground. if you think youre going to fall just grip  harder and sit up straighter. ready? now: for narnia and the north.”

wwＷ．7wenxue.com



CHAPTER TWO

［小.说.t.xt＾天）堂）
a wayside adventure  it was nearly noon on the following day when shasta was wakened by  something warm and soft moving over his face. he opened his eyes and found himself staring  into the long face of a horse; its nose and lips were almost touching his. he remembered  the exciting events of the previous night and sat up. but as he did so he groaned.
"ow, bree," he gasped. "im so sore. all over. i can hardly move.”
"good morning, small one," said bree. "i was afraid you might feel a bit  stiff. it cant be the falls. you didnt have more than a dozen or so, and it was all lovely,  soft springy turf that must have been almost a pleasure to fall on. and the only one that  might have been nasty was broken by that gorse bush. no: its the riding itself that comes  hard at first.
what about breakfast? ive had mine.”
"oh bother breakfast. bother everything," said shasta. "i tell you i cant  move." but the horse nuzzled at him with its nose and pawed him gently with a hoof till he  had to get up.
and then he looked about him and saw where they were. behind them lay a  little copse.
before them the turf, dotted with white flowers, sloped down to the brow of  a cliff. far below them, so that the sound of the breaking waves was very faint, lay the  sea. shasta had never seen it from such a height and never seen so much of it before,  nor dreamed how many colours it had. on either hand the coast stretched away, headland  after headland, and at the points you could see the white foam running up the  rocks but making no noise because it was so far off. there were gulls flying overhead and  the heat shivered on the ground; it was a blazing day. but what shasta chiefly noticed was  the air. he couldnt think what was missing, until at last he realized that there was  no smell of fish in it. for of course, neither in the cottage nor among the nets, had he ever  been away from  
that smell in his life. and this new air was so delicious, and all his old  life seemed so far away, that he forgot for a moment about his bruises and his aching muscles  and said:  "i say, bree, didnt you say something about breakfast?”
"yes, i did," answered bree. "i think youll find something in the saddle- bags. theyre over there on that tree where you hung them up last night - or early this  morning, rather.”
they investigated the saddle-bags and the results were cheering- a meat  pasty, only slightly stale, a lump of dried figs and another lump of green cheese, a  little flask of wine, and some money; about forty crescents in all, which was more than shasta  had ever seen.
while shasta sat down - painfully and cautiously - with his back against a  tree and started on the pasty, bree had a few more mouthfuls of grass to keep him company.
"wont it be stealing to use the money?" asked shasta.
"oh," said the horse, looking up with its mouth full of grass, "i never  thought of that. a free horse and a talking horse mustnt steal, of course. but i think its  all right. were prisoners and captives in enemy country. that money is booty, spoil.  besides, how are we to get any food for you without it? i suppose, like all humans, you  wont eat natural food like grass and oats.”
"i cant.”
"ever tried?”
"yes, i have. i cant get it down at all. you couldnt either if you were  me.”
"youre rum little creatures, you humans," remarked bree.
when shasta had finished his breakfast (which was by far the nicest he had  ever eaten), bree said, "i think ill have a nice roll before we put on that saddle  again." and he proceeded to do so. "thats good. thats very good," he said, rubbing his  back on the turf and waving all four legs in the air. "you ought to have one too, shasta,"  he snorted. "its most refreshing.”
but shasta burst out laughing and said,"you do look funny when youre on  your back!”
"i look nothing of the sort," said bree. but then suddenly he rolled round  on his side, raised his head and looked hard at shasta, blowing a little.
"does it really look funny?" he asked in an anxious voice.
"yes, it does," replied shasta. "but what does it matter?”
"you dont think, do you," said bree, "that it might be a thing talking  horses never do - a silly, clownish trick ive learned from the dumb ones? it would be dreadful  to find, when i get back to narnia, that ive picked up a lot of low, bad habits. what do  you think, shasta? honestly, now. dont spare my feelings. should you think the real,  free horses - the talking kind - do roll?”
"how should i know? anyway i dont think i should bother about it if i were  you. weve got to get there first. do you know the way?”
"i know my way to tashbaan. after that comes the desert. oh, well manage  the desert somehow, never fear. why, well be in sight of the northern mountains then.  think of it!
to narnia and the north! nothing will stop us then. but id be glad to be  past tashbaan.
you and i are safer away from cities.”
"cant we avoid it?”
"not without going along way inland, and that would take us into cultivated  land and main roads; and i wouldnt know the way. no, well just have to creep along  the coast. up here on the downs well meet nothing but sheep and rabbits and gulls and a  few shepherds. and by the way, what about starting?”
shastas legs ached terribly as he saddled bree and climbed into the  saddle, but the horse was kindly to him and went at a soft pace all afternoon. when evening  twilight came they dropped by steep tracks into a valley and found a village. before they got  into it shasta dismounted and entered it on foot to buy a loaf and some onions and  radishes. the horse trotted round by the fields in the dusk and met shasta at the far side.  this became their regular plan every second night.
these were great days for shasta, and every day better than the last as his  muscles hardened and he fell less often. even at the end of his training bree still  said he sat like a bag of flour in the saddle. "and even if it was safe, young un, id be  ashamed to be seen with you on the main road." but in spite of his rude words bree was a  patient teacher. no one can teach riding so well as a horse. shasta learned to trot, to canter,  to jump, and to keep his seat even when bree pulled up suddenly or swung unexpectedly to  the left or the right - which, as bree told him, was a thing you might have to do at any  moment in a battle. and then of course shasta begged to be told of the battles and wars  in which bree had carried the tarkaan. and bree would tell of forced marches and the  fording of swift rivers, of charges and of fierce fights between cavalry and cavalry when  the war horses fought as well as the men, being all fierce stallions, trained to bite and  kick, and to rear at the right moment so that the horses weight as well as the riders would  come down on a enemys crest in the stroke of sword or battleaxe. but bree did not want to  talk about the wars as often as shasta wanted to hear about them. "dont speak of them,  youngster," he would say. "they were only the tisrocs wars and i fought in them as a  slave and a dumb beast. give me the narnian wars where i shall fight as a free horse among  my own people! those will be wars worth talking about. narnia and the north! bra- ha-ha! broo hoo!”
shasta soon learned, when he heard bree talking like that, to prepare for a  gallop.
after they had travelled on for weeks and weeks past more bays and  headlands and rivers and villages than shasta could remember, there came a moonlit night when  they started their journey at evening, having slept during the day. they had left the  downs behind them and were crossing a wide plain with a forest about half a mile away on  their left.
the sea, hidden by low sandhills, was about the same distance on their  right. they had jogged along for about an hour, sometimes trotting and sometimes walking,  when bree suddenly stopped.
"whats up?" said shasta.
"s-s-ssh!" said bree, craning his neck round and twitching his ears. "did  you hear something? listen.”
"it sounds like another horse - between us and the wood," said shasta after  he had listened for about a minute.
"it is another horse," said bree. "and thats what i dont like.”
"isnt it probably just a farmer riding home late?" said shasta with a  yawn.
"dont tell me!" said bree. "thats not a farmers riding. nor a farmers  horse either. cant you tell by the sound? thats quality, that horse is. and its being ridden  by a real horseman. i tell you what it is, shasta. theres a tarkaan under the edge  of that wood.
not on his war horse - its too light for that. on a fine blood mare, i  should say.”
"well, its stopped now, whatever it is," said shasta.
"youre right," said bree. "and why should he stop just when we do? shasta,  my boy, i do believe theres someone shadowing us at last.”
"what shall we do?" said shasta in a lower whisper than before. "do you  think he can see us as well as hear us?”
"not in this light so long as we stay quite still," answered bree. "but  look! theres a cloud coming up. ill wait till that gets over the moon. then well get off  to our right as quietly as we can, down to the shore. we can hide among the sandhills if  the worst comes to the worst.”
they waited till the cloud covered the moon and then, first at a walking  pace and afterwards at a gentle trot, made for the shore.
the cloud was bigger and thicker than it had looked at first and soon the  night grew very dark. just as shasta was saying to himself, "we must be nearly at those  sandhills by  
now," his heart leaped into his mouth because an appalling noise had  suddenly risen up out of the darkness ahead; a long snarling roar, melancholy and utterly  savage. instantly bree swerved round and began galloping inland again as fast as he could  gallop.
"what is it?" gasped shasta.
"lions!" said bree, without checking his pace or turning his head.
after that there was nothing but sheer galloping for some time. at last  they splashed across a wide, shallow stream and bree came to a stop on the far side.  shasta noticed that he was trembling and sweating all over.
"that water may have thrown the brute off our scent," panted bree when he  had partly got his breath again. "we can walk for a bit now.”
as they walked bree said, "shasta, im ashamed of myself. im just as  frightened as a common, dumb calor mene horse. i am really. i dont feel like a talking  horse at all. i dont mind swords and lances and arrows but i cant bear - those creatures.  i think ill trot for a bit.”
about a minute later, however, he broke into a gallop again, and no wonder.  for the roar broke out again, this time on their left from the direction of the forest.
"two of them," moaned bree.
when they had galloped for several minutes without any further noise from  the lions shasta said, "i say! that other horse is galloping beside us now. only a  stones throw away.”
"all the b-better," panted bree. "tarkaan on it - will have a sword -  protect us all.”
"but, bree!" said shasta. "we might just as well be killed by lions as  caught. or 1 might.
theyll hang me for horsestealing." he was feeling less frightened of lions  than bree because he had never met a lion; bree had.
bree only snorted in answer but he did sheer away to his right. oddly  enough the other horse seemed also to be sheering away to the left, so that in a few seconds  the space between them had widened a good deal. but as soon as it did so there came  two more lions roars, immediately after one another, one on the right and the other  on the left, the horses began drawing nearer together. so, apparently, did the lions. the  roaring of the brutes on each side was horribly close and they seemed to be keeping up  with the galloping horses quite easily. then the cloud rolled away. the moonlight,  astonishingly bright, showed up everything almost as if it were broad day. the two horses  and two riders were galloping neck to neck and knee to knee just as if they were in  a race. indeed bree said (afterwards) that a finer race had never been seen in calormen.
shasta now gave himself up for lost and began to wonder whether lions  killed you quickly or played with you as a cat plays with a mouse and how much it  would hurt. at the same time (one sometimes does this at the most frightful moments) he  noticed everything. he saw that the other rider was a very small, slender person,  mail-clad (the moon shone on the mail) and riding magnificently. he had no beard.
something flat and shining was spread out before them. before shasta had  time even to guess what it was there was  a great splash and he found his mouth half full of salt water. the shining  thing had been a long inlet of the sea. both horses were swimming and the water was up to  shastas knees.
there was an angry roaring behind them and looking back shasta saw a great,  shaggy, and terrible shape crouched on the waters edge; but only one. "we must  have shaken off the other lion," he thought.
the lion apparently did not think its prey worth a wetting; at any rate it  made no attempt to take the water in pursuit. the two horses, side by side, were now well  out into the middle of the creek and the opposite shore could be clearly seen. the  tarkaan had not yet spoken a word. "but he will," thought shasta. "as soon as we have landed.  what am i to say? i must begin thinking out a story.”
then, suddenly, two voices spoke at his side.
"oh, i am so tired," said the one. "hold your tongue, hwin, and dont be a  fool," said the other.
"im dreaming," thought shasta. "i could have sworn that other horse  spoke.”
soon the horses were no longer swimming but walking and soon with a great  sound of water running off their sides and tails and with a great crunching of  pebbles under eight hoofs, they came out on the farther beach of the inlet. the tarkaan, to  shastas surprise, showed no wish to ask questions. he did not even look at shasta but seemed  anxious to urge his horse straight on. bree, however, at once shouldered himself in  the other horses way.
"broo-hoo-hah!" he snorted. "steady there! i heard you, i did. theres no  good pretending, maam. 1 heard you. youre a talking horse, a narnian horse  just like me.”
"whats it got to do with you if she is?" said the strange rider fiercely,  laying hand on sword-hilt. but the voice in which the words were spoken had already told  shasta something.
"why, its only a girl!" he exclaimed.
"and what business is it of yours if i am only a girl?" snapped the  stranger. "youre probably only a boy: a rude, common little boy - a slave probably, whos  stolen his masters horse.”
"thats all you know," said shasta.
"hes not a thief, little tarkheena," said bree. "at least, if theres been  any stealing, you might just as well say i stole him. and as for its not being my business,  you wouldnt expect me to pass a lady of my own race in this strange country without  speaking to her?
its only natural i should.”
"i think its very natural too," said the mare.
"i wish youd held your tongue, hwin," said the girl. "look at the trouble  youve got us into.”
"i dont know about trouble," said shasta. "you can clear off as soon as  you like. we shant keep you.”
"no, you shant," said the girl.
"what quarrelsome creatures these humans are," said bree to the mare.  "theyre as bad as mules. lets try to talk a little sense. i take it, maam, your story is  the same as mine?
captured in early youth - years of slavery among the calormenes?”
"too true, sir," said the mare with a melancholy whinny.
"and now, perhaps - escape?”
"tell him to mind his own business, hwin," said the girl.
"no, i wont, aravis," said the mare putting her ears back. "this is my  escape just as much as yours. and im sure a noble war-horse like this is not going to  betray us. we are trying to escape, to get to narnia.”
"and so, of course, are we," said bree. "of course you guessed that at  once. a little boy in rags riding (or trying to ride) a war-horse at dead of night couldnt  mean anything but an escape of some sort. and, if i may say so, a highborn tarkheena riding  alone at night - dressed up in her brothers armour - and very anxious for everyone to mind  their own business and ask her no questions - well, if thats not fishy, call me a  cob!”
"all right then," said aravis. "youve guessed it. hwin and i are running  away. we are trying to get to narnia. and now, what about it?”
"why, in that case, what is to prevent us all going together?" said bree.  "i trust, madam hwin, you will accept such assistance and protection as i may be able to  give you on the journey?”
"why do you keep talking to my horse instead of to me?" asked the girl.
"excuse me, tarkheena," said bree (with just the slightest backward tilt of  his ears), "but thats calormene talk. were free narnians, hwin and i, and i suppose, if  youre running away to narnia, you want to be one too. in that case hwin isnt your horse  any longer.
one might just as well say youre her human.”
the girl opened her mouth to speak and then stopped. obviously she had not  quite seen it in that light before.
"still," she said after a moments pause, "i dont know that theres so  much point in all going together. arent we more likely to be noticed?”
"less," said bree; and the mare said, "oh do lets. i should feel much more  comfortable.
were not even certain of the way. im sure a great charger like this knows  far more than we do.”
"oh come on, bree," said shasta, "and let them go their own way. cant you  see they dont want us?”
"we do," said hwin.
"look here," said the girl. "i dont mind going with you, mr war-horse, but  what about this boy? how do i know hes not a spy?”
"why dont you say at once that you think im not good enough for you?"  said shasta.
"be quiet, shasta," said bree. "the tarkheenas question is quite  reasonable. ill vouch for the boy, tarkheena. hes been true to me and a good friend. and hes  certainly either a narnian or an archenlander.”
"all right, then. lets go together." but she didnt say anything to shasta  and it was obvious that she wanted bree, not him.
"splendid!" said bree. "and now that weve got the water between us and  those dreadful animals, what about you two humans taking off our saddles and our all  having a rest and hearing one anothers stories.”
both the children unsaddled their horses and the horses had a little grass  and aravis produced rather nice things to eat from her saddle-bag? but shasta sulked  and said no thanks, and that he wasnt hungry. and he tried to put on what he thought  very grand and stiff manners, but as a fishermans but is not usually a good place for  learning grand  
manners, the result was dreadful. and he half knew that it wasnt a success  and then became sulkier and more awkward than ever. meanwhile the two horses were  getting on splendidly. they remembered the very same places in narnia - "the  grasslands up above beaversdam" and found that they were some sort of second cousins once  removed. this made things more and more uncomfortable for the humans until at last bree  said, "and now, tarkheena, tell us your story. and dont hurry it - im feeling  comfortable now.”
aravis immediately began, sitting quite still and using a rather different  tone and style from her usual one. for in calormen, story-telling (whether the stories are  true or made up) is a thing youre taught, just as english boys and girls are taught  essay-writing. the difference is that people want to hear the stories, whereas i never heard  of anyone who wanted to read the essays.





CHAPTER THREE

大;学，生，小，说'网
at the gates of tashbaan  "mr name," said the girl at once, "is aravis tarkheena and i am the only  daughter of kidrash tarkaan, the son of rishti tarkaan, the son of kidrash tarkaan, the  son of ilsombreh tisroc, the son of ardeeb tisroc who was descended in a right  line from the god tash. my father is the lord of the province of calavar and is one who  has the right of standing on his feet in his shoes before the face of tisroc himself (may he  live for ever).
my mother (on whom be the peace of the gods) is dead and my father has  married another wife. one of my brothers has fallen in battle against the rebels in  the far west and the other is a child. now it came to pass that my fathers wife, my step- mother, hated me, and the sun appeared dark in her eyes as long as i lived in my fathers  house. and so she persuaded my father to promise me in marriage to ahoshta tarkaan. now this  ahoshta is of base birth, though in these latter years he has won the favour of the  tisroc (may he live for ever) by flattery and evil counsels, and is now made a tarkaan and the  lord of many cities and is likely to be chosen as the grand vizier when the present  grand vizier dies.
moreover he is at least sixty years old and has a hump on his back and his  face resembles that of an ape. nevertheless my father, because of the wealth and power of  this ahoshta, and being persuaded by his wife, sent messengers offering me in marriage,  and the offer was favourably accepted and ahoshta sent word that he would marry me this  very year at the time of high summer.
"when this news was brought to me the sun appeared dark in my eyes and i  laid myself on my bed and wept for a day. but on the second day i rose up and washed my  face and caused my mare hwin to be saddled and took with me a sharp dagger which my  brother had carried in the western wars and rode out alone. and when my fathers  house was out of sight and i was come to a green open place in a certain wood where there  were no dwellings of men, i dismounted from hwin my mare and took out the dagger.  then i parted my clothes where i thought the readiest way lay to my heart and i  prayed to all the  
gods that as soon as i was dead i might find myself with my brother. after  that i shut my eyes and my teeth and prepared to drive the dagger into my heart. but  before i had done so, this mare spoke with the voice of one of the daughters of men and said,  "o my mistress, do not by any means destroy yourself, for if you live you may yet  have good fortune but all the dead are dead alike.”
"i didnt say it half so well as that," muttered the mare.
"hush, maam, hush," said bree, who was thoroughly enjoying the story.  "shes telling it in the grand calormene manner and no story-teller in a tisrocs court could  do it better.
pray go on, tarkheena.”
"when i heard the language of men uttered by my mare," continued aravis, "i  said to myself, the fear of death has disordered my reason and subjected me to  delusions. and i became full of shame for none of my lineage ought to fear death more than  the biting of a gnat. therefore i addressed myself a second time to the stabbing, but hwin  came near to me and put her head in between me and the dagger and discoursed to me most  excellent reasons and rebuked me as a mother rebukes her daughter. and now my wonder  was so great that i forgot about killing myself and about ahoshta and said, `o my  mare, how have you learned to speak like one of the daughters of men? and hwin told  me what is known to all this company, that in narnia there are beasts that talk, and  how she herself was stolen from thence when she was a little foal. she told me also of the  woods and waters of narnia and the castles and the great ships, till i said, `in the  name of tash and azaroth and zardeenah lady of the night, i have a great wish to be in that  country of narnia. `o my mistress, answered the mare, `if you were in narnia you  would be happy, for in that land no maiden is forced to marry against her will.  "and when we had talked together for a great time hope returned to me and i  rejoiced that i had not killed myself. moreover it was agreed between hwin and me  that we should steal ourselves away together and we planned it in this fashion. we  returned to my fathers house and i put on my gayest clothes and sang and danced before my  father and pretended to be delighted with the marriage which he had prepared for me.  also i said to him, `o my father and o the delight of my eyes, give me your licence and  permission to go with one of my maidens alone for three days into the woods to do secret  sacrifices to zardeenah, lady of the night and of maidens, as is proper and customary for  damsels when they must bid farewell to the service of zardeenah and prepare  themselves for marriage. and he answered, `o my daughter and o the delight of my eyes, so  shall it be.  "but when i came out from the presence of my father i went immediately to  the oldest of his slaves, his secretary, who had dandled me on his knees when i was a  baby and loved me more than the air and the light. and i swore him to be secret and begged  him to write a certain letter for me. and he wept and implored me to change my  resolution but in the end he said, `to hear is to obey, and did all my will. and i sealed the  letter and hid it in my bosom.”
"but what was in the letter?" asked shasta.
"be quiet, youngster," said bree. "youre spoiling the story. shell tell  us all about the letter in the right place. go on, tarkheena.”
"then i called the maid who was to go with me to the woods and perform the  rites of zardeenah and told her to wake me very early in the morning. and i became  merry with her and gave her wine to drink; but i had mixed such things in her cup that  i knew she must sleep for a night and a day. as soon as the household of my father had  committed themselves to sleep i arose and put on an armour of my brothers which i  always kept in my chamber in his memory. i put into my girdle all the money i had and  certain choice jewels and provided myself also with food, and saddled the mare with my own  hands and rode away in the second watch of the night. i directed my course not to the  woods where my father supposed that i would go but north and east to tashbaan.
"now for three days and more i knew that my father would not seek me, being  deceived by the words i had said to him. and on the fourth day we arrived at the  city of azim balda. now azim balda stands at the meeting of many roads and from it the  posts of the tisroc (may he live for ever) ride on swift horses to every part of the  empire: and it is one of the rights and privileges of the greater tarkaans to send messages by  them. i therefore went to the chief of the messengers in the house of imperial posts in azim  balda and said, `o dispatcher of messages, here is a letter from my uncle ahoshta  tarkaan to kidrash tarkaan lord of calavar. take now these five crescents and cause it  to be sent to him. and the chief of the messengers said, `to hear is to obey.  "this letter was feigned to be written by ahoshta and this was the  signification of the writing: `ahoshta tarkaan to kidrash tarkaan, salutation and peace. in the  name of tash the irresistible, the inexorable. be it known to you that as i made my  journey towards your house to perform the contract of marriage between me and your daughter  aravis tarkheena, it pleased fortune and the gods that i fell in with her in the  forest when she had ended the rites and sacrifices of zardeenah according to the custom of  maidens. and when i learned who she was, being delighted with her beauty and discretion,  i became inflamed with love and it appeared to me that the sun would be dark to me  if i did not marry her at once. accordingly i prepared the necessary sacrifices and  married your daughter the same hour that i met her and have returned with her to my own  house. and we both pray and charge you to come hither as speedily as you may that we  may be delighted with your face and speech; and also that you may bring with you  the dowry of my wife, which, by reason of my great charges and expenses, i require  without delay.
and because thou and i are brothers i assure myself that you will not be  angered by the haste of my marriage which is wholly occasioned by the great love i bear  your daughter.
and i commit you to the care of all the gods.  "as soon as i had done this i rode on in all haste from azim balda, fearing  no pursuit and expecting that my father, having received such a letter, would send  messages to ahoshta or go to him himself, and that before the matter was discovered i should be  beyond tashbaan. and that is the pith of my story until this very night when i was  chased by lions and met you at the swimming of the salt water.”
"and what happened to the girl - the one you drugged?" asked shasta.
"doubtless she was beaten for sleeping late," said aravis coolly. "but she  was a tool and spy of my stepmothers. i am very glad they should beat her.”
"i say, that was hardly fair," said shasta.
"i did not do any of these things for the sake of pleasing you," said  aravis.
"and theres another thing i dont understand about that story," said  shasta. "youre not grown up, i dont believe youre any older than i am. i dont believe  youre as old. how could you be getting married at your age?”
aravis said nothing, but bree at once said, "shasta, dont display your  ignorance. theyre always married at that age in the great tarkaan families.”
shasta turned very red (though it was hardly light enough for the others to  see this) and felt snubbed. aravis asked bree for his story. bree told it, and shasta  thought that he put in a great deal more than he needed about the falls and the bad riding.  bree obviously thought it very funny, but aravis did not laugh. when bree had finished  they all went to sleep.
next day all four of them, two horses and two humans, continued their  journey together.
shasta thought it had been much pleasanter when he and bree were on their  own. for now it was bree and aravis who did nearly all the talking. bree had lived a  long time in calormen and had always been among tarkaans and tarkaans horses, and so of  course he knew a great many of the same people and places that aravis knew. she  would always be saying things like, "but if you were at the fight of zulindreh you would  have seen my cousin alimash," and bree would answer, "oh, yes, alimash, he was only  captain of the chariots, you know. i dont quite hold with chariots or the kind of horses  who draw chariots. thats not real cavalry. but he is a worthy nobleman. he filled  my nosebag with sugar after the taking of teebeth." or else bree would say, "i was down at  the lake of mezreel that summer," and aravis would say, "oh, mezreel! i had a friend  there, lasaraleen tarkheena. what a delightful place it is. those gardens, and the  valley of the thousand perfumes!" bree was not in the least trying to leave shasta out of  things, though shasta sometimes nearly thought he was. people who know a lot of the  same things can hardly help talking about them, and if youre there you can  hardly help feeling that youre out of it.
hwin the mare was rather shy before a great war-horse like bree and said  very little. and aravis never spoke to shasta at all if she could help it.
soon, however, they had more important things to think of. they were  getting near tashbaan. there were more, and larger, villages, and more people on the  roads. they now did nearly all their travelling by night and hid as best they could  during the day. and  
at every halt they argued and argued about what they were to do when they  reached tashbaan. everyone had been putting off this difficulty, but now it could  be put off no longer. during these discussions aravis became a little, a very little,  less unfriendly to shasta; one usually gets on better with people when one is making plans  than when one is talking about nothing in particular.
bree said the first thing now to do was to fix a place where they would all  promise to meet on the far side of tashbaan even if, by any ill luck, they got  separated in passing the city. he said the best place would be the tombs of the ancient kings on the  very edge of the desert. "things like great stone bee-hives," he said, "you cant  possibly miss them.
and the best of it is that none of the calormenes will go near them because  they think the place is haunted by ghouls and are afraid of it." aravis asked if it wasnt  really haunted by ghouls. but bree said he was a free narnian horse and didnt believe in  these calormene tales. and then shasta said he wasnt a calormene either and didnt care a  straw about these old stories of ghouls. this wasnt quite true. but it rather  impressed aravis (though at the moment it annoyed her too) and of course she said she didnt mind  any number of ghouls either. so it was settled that the tombs should be their assembly  place on the other side of tashbaan, and everyone felt they were getting on very well  till hwin humbly pointed out that the real problem was not where they should go when  they had got through tashbaan but how they were to get through it.
"well settle that tomorrow, maam," said bree. "time for a little sleep  now.”
but it wasnt easy to settle. araviss first suggestion was that they  should swim across the river below the city during the night and not go into tashbaan at all. but  bree had two reasons against this. one was that the river-mouth was very wide and it  would be far too long a swim for hwin to do, especially with a rider on her back. (he  thought it would be too long for himself too, but he said much less about that). the other was  that it would be full of shipping and of course anyone on the deck of a ship who saw two  horses swimming past would be almost certain to be inquisitive.
shasta thought they should go up the river above tashbaan and cross it  where it was narrower. but bree explained that there were gardens and pleasure houses on  both banks of the river for miles and that there would be tarkaans and tarkheenas  living in them and riding about the roads and having water parties on the river. in fact it  would be the most likely place in the world for meeting someone who would recognize aravis or  even himself.
"well have to have a disguise," said shasta.
hwin said it looked to her as if the safest thing was to go right through  the city itself from gate to gate because one was less likely to be noticed in the crowd. but  she approved of the idea of disguise as well. she said, "both the human will have to dress  in rags and look like peasants or slaves and all araviss armour and our saddles and things  must be made into bundles and put on our backs, and the children must pretend to drive  us and people will think were on pack-horses.”
"my dear hwin!" said aravis rather scornfully. "as anyone could mistake  bree for anything but a war-hors however you disguised him!”
"i should think not, indeed," said bree, snorting an letting his ears go  ever so little back.
"i know its not a very good plan," said hwin. "but i think its our only  chance. and we havent been groomed for ages and were not looking quite ourselves (at  least, im sure im not). i do think if we get well plastered with mud and go along with  our heads down as if were tired and lazy -and dont lift our hooves hardly at all - we  might not be noticed.
and our tails ought to be cut shorter: not neatly, you know, but all  ragged.”
"my dear madam," said bree. "have you pictured to yourself how very  disagreeable it would be to arrive in narnia in that condition?”
"well," said hwin humbly (she was a very sensible mare), "the main thing is  to get there.”
though nobody much liked it, it was hwins plan which had to be adopted in  the end. it was a troublesome one and involved a certain amount of what shasta called  stealing, and bree called "raiding". one farm lost a few sacks that evening and another  lost a coil of rope the next: but some tattered old boys clothes for aravis to wear had  to be fairly bought and paid for in a village. shasta returned with them in triumph just  as evening was closing in. the others were waiting for him among the trees at the foot of  a low range of wooded hills which lay right across their path. everyone was feeling  excited because this was the last hill; when they reached the ridge at the top they would be  looking down on tashbaan. "i do wish we were safely past it," muttered shasta to hwin. "oh  i do, i do,”
said hwin fervently.
that night they wound their way through the woods up to the ridge by a  wood-cutters track. and when they came out of the woods at the top they could see  thousands of lights in the valley down below them. shasta had had no notion of what a great  city would be like and it frightened him. they had their supper and the children got some  sleep. but the horses woke them very early in the morning.
the stars were still out and the grass was terribly cold and wet, but  daybreak was just beginning, far to their right across the sea. aravis went a few steps away  into the wood and came back looking odd in her new, ragged clothes and carrying her real  ones in a bundle. these, and her armour and shield and scimitar and the two saddles  and the rest of the horses fine furnishings were put into the sacks. bree and hwin had  already got themselves as dirty and bedraggled as they could and it remained to shorten  their tails. as the only tool for doing this was araviss scimitar, one of the packs had to  be undone again in order to get it out. it was a longish job and rather hurt the  horses.
"my word!" said bree, "if i wasnt a talking horse what a lovely kick in  the face i could give you! i thought you were going to cut it, not pull it out. thats what  it feels like.”
but in spite of semi-darkness and cold fingers all was done in the end, the  big packs bound on the horses, the rope halters (which they were now wearing instead  of bridles and reins) in the childrens hands, and the journey began.
"remember," said bree. "keep together if we possibly can. if not, meet at  the tombs of the ancient kings, and whoever gets there first must wait for the others.”
"and remember," said shasta. "dont you two horses forget yourselves and  start talking, whatever happens.”

wＷw。xiabｏok.com



CHAPTER FOUR

！小＠说＃txt＄天＾堂＆
shasta falls in with the narnians  at first shasta could see nothing in the valley below him but a sea of mist  with a few domes and pinnacles rising from it; but as the light increased and the mist  cleared away he saw more and more. a broad river divided itself into two streams and on  the island between them stood the city of tashbaan, one of the wonders of the world.  round the very edge of the island, so that the water lapped against the stone, ran  high walls strengthened with so many towers that he soon gave up trying to count them.  inside the walls the island rose in a hill and every bit of that hill, up to the  tisrocs palace and the great temple of tash at the top, was completely covered with buildings -  terrace above terrace, street above street, zigzag roads or huge flights of steps  bordered with orange trees and lemon trees, roofgardens, balconies, deep archways, pillared  colonnades, spires, battlements, minarets, pinnacles. and when at last the sun rose out of the  sea and the great silver-plated dome of the temple flashed back its light, he was  almost dazzled.
"get on, shasta," bree kept saying.
the river banks on each side of the valley were such a mass of gardens that  they looked at first like forest, until you got closer and saw the white walls of  innumerable houses peeping out from beneath the trees. soon after that, shasta noticed a  delicious smell of flowers and fruit. about fifteen minutes later they were down among them,  plodding on a level road with white walls on each side and trees bending over the walls.
"i say," said shasta in an awed voice. "this is a wonderful place!”
"i daresay," said bree. "but i wish we were safely through it and out at  the other side.
narnia and the north!”
at that moment a low, throbbing noise began which gradually swelled louder  and louder till the whole valley seemed to be swaying with it. it was a musical noise,  but so strong and solemn as to be a little frightening.
"thats the horns blowing for the city gates to be open," said bree. "we  shall be there in a minute. now, aravis, do droop your shoulders a bit and step heavier and try  to look less like a princess. try to imagine youve been kicked and cuffed and called  names all your life.”
"if it comes to that," said aravis, "what about you drooping your head a  bit more and arching your neck a bit less and trying to look less like a war-horse?”
"hush," said bree. "here we are.”
and they were. they had come to the rivers edge and the road ahead of them  ran along a many-arched bridge. the water danced brightly in the early sunlight; away  to the right nearer the rivers mouth, they caught a glimpse ships masts. several other  travellers were before them on the bridge, mostly peasants driving laden donkeys and mules  or carrying baskets on their heads. the children and horses joined the crowd.
"is anything wrong?" whispered shasta to aravis, who had an odd look on her  face.
"oh its all very well for you," whispered aravis rather savagely. "what  would you care about tashbaan? but i ought to be riding in on a litter with soldiers  before me and slaves behind, and perhaps going to a feast in the tisrocs palace (may he live  for ever) - not sneaking in like this. its different for you.”
shasta thought all this very silly.
at the far end of the bridge the walls of the city towered high above them  and the brazen gates stood open in the gateway which was really wide but looked narrow  because it was so very high. half a dozen soldiers, leaning on their spears, stood on each  side. aravis couldnt help thinking, "theyd all jump to attention and salute me if they  knew whose daughter i am." but the others were only thinking of how theyd get through  and hoping the soldiers would not ask any questions. fortunately they did not. but one  of them picked a carrot out of a peasants basket and threw it at shasta with a  rough laugh, saying:  "hey! horse-boy! youll catch it if your master finds youve been using his  saddle-horse for pack work.”
this frightened him badly for of course it showed that no one who knew  anything about horses would mistake bree for anything but a charger.
"its my masters orders, so there!" said shasta. but it would have been  better if he had held his tongue for the soldier gave him a box on the side of his face that  nearly knocked him down and said, "take that, you young filth, to teach you how to talk to  freemen." but  
they all slunk into the city without being stopped. shasta cried only a  very little; he was used to hard knocks.
inside the gates tashbaan did not at first seem so splendid as it had  looked from a distance. the first street was narrow and there were hardly any windows in  the walls on each side. it was much more crowded than shasta had expected: crowded  partly by the peasants (on their way to market) who had come in with them, but also with  watersellers, sweetmeat sellers, porters, soldiers, beggars, ragged children, hens, stray  dogs, and bare-footed slaves. what you would chiefly have noticed if you had been there  was the smells, which came from unwashed people, unwashed dogs, scent, garlic, onions, and  the piles of refuse which lay everywhere.
shasta was pretending to lead but it was really bree, who knew the way and  kept guiding him by little nudges with his nose. they soon turned to the left and began  going up a steep hill. it was much fresher and pleasanter, for the road was bordered  by trees and there were houses only on the right side; on the other they looked out over  the roofs of houses in the lower town and could see some way up the river. then they  went round a hairpin bend to their right and continued rising. they were zigzagging up  to the centre of tashbaan. soon they came to finer streets. great statues of the gods and  heroes of calormen - who are mostly impressive rather than agreeable to look at- rose  on shining pedestals. palm trees and pillared arcades cast shadows over the burning  pavements. and through the arched gateways of many a palace shasta caught sight of green  branches, cool fountains, and smooth lawns. it must be nice inside, he thought.
at every turn shasta hoped they were getting out of the crowd, but they  never did. this made their progress very slow, and every now and then they had to stop  altogether. this usually happened because a loud voice shouted out "way, way, way, for the  tarkaan", or "for the tarkheena", or "for the fifteenth vizier", "or for the  ambassador", and everyone in the crowd would crush back against the walls; and above their heads  shasta would sometimes see the great lord or lady for whom all the fuss was being made,  lolling upon a litter which four or even six gigantic slaves carried on their bare  shoulders. for in tashbaan there is only one traffic regulation, which is that everyone who  is less important has to get out of the way for everyone who is more important;  unless you want a cut from a whip or punch from the butt end of a spear.
it was in a splendid street very near the top of the city (the tisrocs  palace was the only thing above it) that the most disastrous of these stoppages occurred.
"way! way! way!" came the voice. "way for the white barbarian king, the  guest of the tisroc (may he live for ever)! way for the narnian lords.”
shasta tried to get out of the way and to make bree go back. but no horse,  not even a talking horse from narnia, backs easily. and a woman with a very edgy  basket in her hands, who was just behind shasta, pushed the basket hard against his  shoulders, and said, "now then! who are you shoving!" and then someone else jostled him  from the side and in the confusion of the moment he lost hold of bree. and then the  whole crowd  
behind him became so stiffened and packed tight that he couldnt move at  all. so he found himself, unintentionally, in the first row and had a fine sight of the  party that was coming down the street.
it was quite unlike any other party they had seen that day. the crier who  went before it shouting "way, way!" was the only calormene in it. and there was no litter;  everyone was on foot. there were about half a dozen men and shasta had never seen  anyone like them before. for one thing, they were all as fair-skinned as himself, and  most of them had fair hair. and they were not dressed like men of calormen. most of them  had legs bare to the kneee. their tunics were of fine, bright, hardy colours -  woodland green, or gay yellow, or fresh blue. instead of turbans they wore steel or silver  caps, some of them set with jewels, and one with little wings on each side of it. a few were  bare-headed. the swords at their sides were long and straight, not curved like calormene  scimitars. and instead of being grave and mysterious like most calormenes, they walked  with a swing and let their arms and shoulders free, and chatted and laughed. one was  whistling. you could see that they were ready to be friends with anyone who was friendly  and didnt give a fig for anyone who wasnt. shasta thought he had never seen anything so  lovely in his life.
but there was not time to enjoy it for at once a really dreadful thing  happened. the leader of the fair-headed men suddenly pointed at shasta, cried out, "there he is!  theres our runaway!" and seized him by the shoulder. next moment he gave shasta a  smack - not a cruel one to make you cry but a sharp one to let you know you are in  disgrace and added, shaking:  "shame on you, my lord! fie for shame! queen susans eyes are red with  weeping because of you. what! truant for a whole night! where have you been?”
shasta would have darted under brees body and tried to make himself scarce  in the crowd if he had had the least chance; but the fair-haired men were all  round him by now and he was held firm.
of course his first impulse was to say that he was only poor arsheesh the  fishermans son and that the foreign lord must have mistaken him for someone else. but  then, the very last thing he wanted to do in that crowded place was to start explaining who he  was and what he was doing. if he started on that, he would soon be asked where he had  got his horse from, and who aravis was - and then, goodbye to any chance of getting  through tashbaan. his next impulse was to look at bree for help. but bree had no  intention of letting all the crowd know that he could talk, and stood looking just as  stupid as a horse can. as for aravis, shasta did not even dare to look at her for fear of  drawing attention.
and there was no time to think, for the leader of the narnians said at  once:  "take one of his little lordships hands, peridan, of your courtesy, and  ill take the other.
and now, on. our royal sisters mind will be greatly eased when she sees  our young scapegrace safe in our lodging.”
and so, before they were half-way through tashbaan, all their plans were  ruined, and without even a chance to say good-bye to the others shasta found himself  being marched off among strangers and quite unable to guess what might be going to happen  next. the narnian king - for shasta began to see by the way the rest spoke to him  that he must be a king - kept on asking him questions; where he had been, how he had got out,  what he had done with his clothes, and didnt he know that he had been very naughty.  only the king called it "naught" instead of naughty.
and shasta said nothing in answer, because he couldnt think of anything to  say that would not be dangerous.
"what! all mum?" asked the king. "i must plainly tell you, prince, that  this hangdog silence becomes one of your blood even less than the scape itself. to run  away might pass for a boys frolic with some spirit in it. but the kings son of  archenland should avouch his deed; not hang his head like a calormene slave.”
this was very unpleasant, for shasta felt all the time that this young king  was the very nicest kind of grown-up and would have liked to make a good impression on  him.
the strangers led him-held tightly by both hands-along a narrow street and  down a flight of shallow stairs and then up another to a wide doorway in a white wall  with two tall, dark cypress trees, one on each side of it. once through the arch, shasta  found himself in a courtyard which was also a garden. a marble basin of clear water in the  centre was kept continually rippling by the fountain that fell into it. orange trees grew  round it out of smooth grass, and the four white walls which surrounded the lawn were  covered with climbing roses. the noise and dust and crowding of the streets seemed  suddenly fad away. he was led rapidly across the garden and then into a dark doorway.  the crier remained outside. after that they took him along a corridor, where the  stone floor felt beautifully cool to his hot feet, and up some stairs. a moment later he  found himself blinking in the light of a big, airy room with wide open windows, all  looking north so that no sun came in. there was a carpet on the floor more wonderfully  coloured than anything he had ever seen and his feet sank down into it as if he were  treading in thick moss. all round the walls there were low sofas with rich cushions on them,  and the room seemed to be full of people; very queer people some of them, thought  shasta. but he had no time to think of that before the most beautiful lady he had ever seen  rose from her place and threw her arms round him and kissed him, saying:  "oh corin, corin, how could you? and thou and i such close friends ever  since thy mother died. and what should i have said to thy royal father if i came home  without thee? would have been a cause almost of war between archenland and narnia  which are friends time out of mind. it was naught, playmate, very naught of thee to  use us so.”
"apparently," thought shasta to himself, "im being mistaken for a prince  of archenland, wherever that is. and these must be the narnians. i wonder where the real  corin is?" but these thoughts did not help him say anything out loud.
"where hast been, corin?" said the lady, her hands still on shastas  shoulders.
"i- i dont know," stammered shasta.
"there it is, susan," said the king. "i could get no tale out of him, true  or false.”
"your majesties! queen susan! king edmund!" said a voice: and when shasta  turned to look at the speaker he nearly jumped out of his skin with surprise. for  this was one of these queer people whom he had noticed out of the corner of his eye when he  first came into the room. he was about the same height as shasta himself. from the  waist upwards he was like a man, but his legs were hairy like a goats, and shaped like a  goats and he had goats hooves and a tail. his skin was rather red and he had curly hair  and a short pointed beard and two little horns. he was in fact a faun, which is a  creature shasta had never seen a picture of or even heard of. and if youve read a book called  the lion, the witch and the wardrobe you may like to know that this was the very same  faun, tumnus by name, whom queen susans sister lucy had met on the very first day when  she found her way into narnia. but he was a good deal older now for by this time  peter and susan and edmund and lucy had been kings and queens of narnia for several years.
"your majesties," he was saying, "his little highness has had a touch of  the sun. look at him! he is dazed. he does not know where he is.”
then of course everyone stopped scolding shasta and asking him questions  and he was made much of and laid on a sofa and cushions were put under his head and he  was given iced sherbet in a golden cup to drink and told to keep very quiet.
nothing like this had ever happened to shasta in his life before. he had  never even imagined lying on anything so comfortable as that sofa or drinking anything  so delicious as that sherbet. he was still wondering what had happened to the others and  how on earth he was going to escape and meet them at the tombs, and what would happen  when the real corin turned up again. but none of these worries seemed so pressing  now that he was comfortable. and perhaps, later on, there would be nice things to eat!
meanwhile the people in that cool airy room were very interesting. besides  the faun there were two dwarfs (a kind of creature he had never seen before) and a  very large raven.
the rest were all humans; grown-ups, but young, and all of them, both men  and women, had nicer faces and voices than most calormenes. and soon shasta found  himself taking an interest in the conversation. "now, madam," the king was saying to queen  susan (the lady who had kissed shasta). "what think you? we have been in this city  fully three weeks. have you yet settled in your mind whether you will marry this dark- faced lover of yours, this prince rabadash, or no?”
the lady shook her head. "no, brother," she said, "not for all the jewels  in tashbaan.”
("hullo!" thought shasta. "although theyre king and queen, theyre brother  and sister, not married to one another.")
"truly, sister," said the king, "i should have loved you the less if you  had taken him. and i tell you that at the first coming of the tisrocs ambassadors into narnia  to treat of this marriage, and later when the prince was our guest at cair paravel, it was a  wonder to me that ever you could find it in your heart to show him so much favour.”
"that was my folly, edmund," said queen susan, "of which i cry you mercy.  yet when he was with us in narnia, truly this prince bore himself in another fashion  than he does now in tashbaan. for i take you all to witness what marvellous feats he did  in that great tournament and hastilude which our brother the high king made for him, and  how meekly and courteously he consorted with us the space of seven days. but  here, in his own city, he has shown another face.”
"ah!" croaked the raven. "it is an old saying: see the bear in his own den  before you judge of his conditions.”
"thats very true, sallowpad," said one of the dwarfs. "and another is,  come, live with me and youll know me.”
"yes," said the king. "we have now seen him for what he is: that is, a most  proud, bloody, luxurious, cruel, and selfpleasing tryant.”
"then in the name of aslan," said susan, "let us leave tashbaan this very  day.”
"theres the rub, sister," said edmund. "for now i must open to you all  that has been growing in my mind these last two days and more. peridan, of your courtesy  look to the door and see that there is no spy upon us. all well? so. for now we must be  secret.”
everyone had begun to look very serious. queen susan jumped up and ran to  her brother.
"oh, edmund," she cried. "what is it? there is something dreadful in your  face.”

wwＷ、xiabook.com



CHAPTER FIVE

小，说，t，xt，天，堂
prince corin  "my dear sister and very good lady," said king edmund, "you must now show  your courage. for i tell you plainly we are in no small danger.”
"what is it, edmund asked the queen.
"it is this," said edmund. "i do not think we shall find it easy to leave  tashbaan. while the prince had hope that you would take him, we were honoured guests. but  by the lions mane, i think that as soon as he has your flat denial we shall be no better  than prisoners.”
one of the dwarfs gave a low whistle.
"i warned your majesties, i warned you," said sallowpad the raven. "easily  in but not easily out, as the lobster said in the lobster pot!”
"i have been with the prince this morning," continued edmund. "he is little  used (mores the pity) to having his will crossed. and he is very chafed at your long  delays and doubtful answers. this morning he pressed very hard to know your mind. i  put it aside-meaning at the same time to diminish his hopes - with some light common  jests about womens fancies, and hinted that his suit was likely to be cold. he grew  angry and dangerous. there was a sort of threatening, though still veiled under a  show of courtesy, in every word he spoke.”
"yes," said tumnus. "and when i supped with the grand vizier last night, it  was the same. he asked me how i like tashbaan. and i (for i could not tell him i  hated every stone of it and i would not lie) told him that now, when high summer was  coming on, my heart turned to the cool woods and dewy slopes of narnia. he gave a smile  that meant no good and said, `there is nothing to hinder you from dancing there again,  little goatfoot; always provided you leave us in exchange a bride for our prince.“
"do you mean he would make me his wife by force?" exclaimed susan.
"thats my fear, susan," said edmund: "wife: or slave which is worse.”
"but how can he? does the tisroc think our brother the high king would  suffer such an outrage?”
"sire," said peridan to the king. "they would not be so mad. do they think  there are no swords and spears in narnia?”
"alas," said edmund. "my guess is that the tisroc has very small fear of  narnia. we are a little land. and little lands on the borders of a great empire were  always hateful to the lords of the great empire. he longs to blot them out, gobble them up. when  first he suffered the prince to come to cair paravel as your lover, sister, it may  be that he was only seeking an occasion against us. most likely he hopes to make one  mouthful of narnia and archenland both.”
"let him try," said the second dwarf. "at sea we are as big as he is. and  if he assaults us by land, he has the desert to cross.”
"true, friend," said edmund. "but is the desert a sure defence? what does  sallowpad say?”
"i know that desert well," said the raven. "for i have flown above it far  and wide in my younger days," (you may be sure that shasta pricked up his ears at this  point). "and this is certain; that if the tisroc goes by the great oasis he can never lead a  great army across it into archenland. for though they could reach the oasis by the end of  their first days march, yet the springs there would be too little for the thirst of all  those soldiers and their beasts. but there is another way.”
shasta listened more attentively still.
"he that would find that way," said the raven, "must start from the tombs  of the ancient kings and ride northwest so that the double peak of mount pire is always  straight ahead of him. and so, in a days riding or a little more, he shall come to the  head of a stony valley, which is so narrow that a man might be within a furlong of it a  thousand times and never know that it was there. and looking down this valley he will see  neither grass nor water nor anything else good. but if he rides on down it he will come to a  river and can ride by the water all the way into archenland.”
"and do the calormenes know of this western way?" asked the queen.
"friends, friends," said edmund, "what is the use of all this discourse? we  are not asking whether narnia or calormen would win if war arose between them. we are  asking how to save the honour of the queen and our own lives out of this devilish city.  for though my brother, peter the high king, defeated the tisroc a dozen times over, yet  long before that day our throats would be cut and the queens grace would be the wife, or  more likely, the slave, of this prince.”
"we have our weapons, king," said the first dwarf. "and this is a  reasonably defensible house.”
"as to that," said the king, "i do not doubt that every one of us would  sell our lives dearly in the gate and they would not come at the queen but over our dead  bodies. yet we should be merely rats fighting in a trap when alls said.”
"very true," croaked the raven. "these last stands in a house make good  stories, but nothing ever came of them. after their first few repulses the enemy always  set the house on fire.”
"i am the cause of all this," said susan, bursting into tears. "oh, if only  i had never left cair paravel. our last happy day was before those ambassadors came from  calormen.
the moles were planting an orchard for us . . . oh . . . oh.”
and she buried her face in her hands and sobbed.
"courage, su, courage," said edmund. "remember-but what is the matter with  you, master tumnus?" for the faun was holding both his horns with his hands as  if he were  
trying to keep his head on by them and writhing to and fro as if he had a  pain in his inside.
"dont speak to me, dont speak to me," said tumnus. "im thinking. im  thinking so that i can hardly breathe. wait, wait, do wait.”
there was a moments puzzled silence and then the faun looked up, drew a  long breath, mopped its forehead and said:  "the only difficulty is how to get down to our ship-with some stores, too- without being seen and stopped.”
"yes," said a dwarf dryly. "just as the beggars only difficulty about  riding is that he has no horse.”
"wait, wait," said mr tumnus impatiently. "all we need is some pretext for  going down to our ship today and taking stuff on board.”
"yes," said king edmund doubtfully.
"well, then," said the faun, "how would it be if your majesties bade the  prince to a great banquet to be held on board our own galleon, the spendour hyaline, tomorrow  night?
and let the message be worded as graciously as the queen can contrive  without pledging her honour: so as to give the prince a hope that she is weakening.”
"this is very good counsel, sire," croaked the raven.
"and then," continued tumnus excitedly, "everyone will expect us to be  going down to the ship all day, making preparations for our guests. and let some of us go  to the bazaars and spend every minim we have at the fruiterers and the sweetmeat sellers  and the wine merchants, just as we would if we were really giving a feast. and let us  order magicians and jugglers and dancing girls and flute players, all to be on board  tomorrow night.”
"i see, i see," said king edmund, rubbing his hands.
"and then," said tumnus, "well all be on board tonight. and as soon as it  is quite dark-”
"up sails and out oars-!" said the king.
"and so to sea," cried tumnus, leaping up and beginning to dance.
"and our nose northward," said the first dwarf.
"running for home! hurrah for narnia and the north!" said the other.
"and the prince waking next morning and finding his birds flown!" said  peridan, clapping his hands.
"oh master tumnus, dear master tumnus," said the queen, catching his hands  and swinging with him as he danced. "you have saved us all.”
"the prince will chase us," said another lord, whose name shasta had not  heard.
"thats the least of my fears," said edmund. "i have seen all the shipping  in the river and theres no tall ship of war nor swift galley there. i wish he may chase us!  for the splendour hyaline could sink anything he has to send after her - if we were  overtaken at all.”
"sire," said the raven. "you shall hear no better plot than the fauns  though we sat in council for seven days. and now, as we birds say, nests before eggs. which  is as much as to say, let us all take our food and then at once be about our business.”
everyone arose at this and the doors were opened and the lords and the  creatures stood aside for the king and queen to go out first. shasta wondered what he ought  to do, but mr tumnus said, "lie there, your highness, and i will bring you up a little  feast to yourself in a few moments. there is no need for you to move until we are  all ready to embark.”
shasta laid his head down again on the pillows and soon he was alone in the  room.
"this is perfectly dreadful," thought shasta. it never came into his head  to tell these narnians the whole truth and ask for their help. having been brought up by  a hard, closefisted man like arsheesh, he had a fixed habit of never telling grown -ups anything if he could help it: he thought they would always spoil or stop whatever you  were trying to do. and he thought that even if the narnian king might be friendly to the  two horses, because they were talking beasts of narnia, he would hate aravis, because  she was a calormene, and either sell her for a slave or send her back to her father.  as for himself, "i simply dnt tell them im not prince corin now," thought shasta. "ive  heard all their plans. if they knew i wasnt one of themselves, theyd never let me out of  this house alive.
theyd be afraid id betray them to the tisroc. theyd kill me. and if the  real corin turns up, itll all come out, and they will!" he had, you see, no idea of how  noble and free-born people behave.
"what am i to do? what am i to do?" he kept saying to himself. "what-hullo,  here comes that goaty little creature again.”
the faun trotted in, half dancing, with a tray in its hands which was  nearly as large as itself. this he set on an inlaid table beside shastas sofa, and sat down  himself on the carpeted floor with his goaty legs crossed.
"now, princeling," he said. "make a good dinner. it will be your last meal  in tashbaan.”
it was a fine meal after the calormene fashion. i dont know whether you  would have liked it or not, but shasta did. there were lobsters, and salad, and snipe  stuffed with almonds and truffles, and a complicated dish made of chickenlivers and rice  and raisins and nuts, and there were cool melons and gooseberry fools and mulberry  fools, and every kind of nice thing that can be made with ice. there was also a little  flagon of the sort of wine that is called "white" though it is really yellow.
while shasta was eating, the good little faun, who thought he was still  dazed with sunstroke, kept talking to him about the fine times he would have when they  all got home; about his good old father king lune of archenland and the little  castle where he lived on the southern slopes of the pass. "and dont forget," said mr  tumnus, "that you are promised your first suit of armour and your first war horse on your  next birthday. and then your highness will begin to learn how to tilt and joust. and in a few  years, if all goes well, king peter has promised your royal father that he himself will  make you knight at cair paravel. and in the meantime there will be plenty of comings  and goings between narnia and archenland across the neck of the mountains. and of  course you remember you have promised to come for a whole week to stay with me for the  summer festival, and therell be bonfires and all-night dances of fauns and dryads  in the heart of the woods and, who knows?-we might see aslan himself!”
when the meal was over the faun told shasta to stay quietly where he was.  "and it wouldnt do you any harm to have a little sleep," he added. "ill call you  in plenty of time to get on board. and then, home. narnia and the north!”
shasta had so enjoyed his dinner and all the things tumnus had been telling  him that when he was left alone his thoughts took a different turn. he only hoped  now that the real prince corin would not turn up until it was too late and that he would be  taken away to narnia by ship. i am afraid he did not think at all of what might happen to  the real corin when he was left behind in tashbaan. he was a little worried about aravis  and bree waiting for him at the tombs. but then he said to himself, "well, how can i  help it?" and, "anyway, that aravis thinks shes too good to go about with me, so she can  jolly well go alone," and at the same time he couldnt help feeling that it would be much  nicer going to narnia by sea than toiling across the desert.
when he had thought all this he did what i expect you would have done if  you had been up very early and had a long walk and a great deal of excitement and then a  very good meal, and were lying on a sofa in a cool room with no noise in it except  when a bee came buzzing in through the wide open windows. he fell asleep.
what woke him was a loud crash. he jumped up off the sofa, staring. he saw  at once from the mere look of the room - the lights and shadows all looked  different - that he must have slept for several hours. he saw also what had made the crash: a  costly porcelain vase which had been standing on the window-sill lay on -the floor  broken into about thirty pieces. but he hardly noticed all these things. what he did  notice was two hands gripping the window-sill from outside. they gripped harder and harder  (getting  
white at the knuckles) and then up came a head and a pair of shoulders. a  moment later there was a boy of shastas own age sitting astride the sill with one leg  hanging down inside the room.
shasta had never seen his own face in a looking-glass. even if he had, he  might not have realized that the other boy was (at ordinary times) almost exactly like  himself. at the moment this boy was not particularly like anyone for he had the finest  black eye you ever saw, and a tooth missing, and his clothes (which must have been splendid  ones when he put them on) were torn and dirty, and there was both blood and mud on his  face.
"who are you?" said the boy in a whisper.
"are you prince corin?" said shasta.
"yes, of course," said the other. "but who are you?”
"im nobody, nobody in particular, i mean," said shasta. "king edmund  caught me in the street and mistook me for you. i suppose we must look like one another. can  i get out the way youve got in?”
"yes, if youre any good at climbing," said corin. "but why are you in such  a hurry? i say: we ought to be able to get some fun out of this being mistaken for one  another.”
"no, no," said shasta. "we must change places at once. itll be simply  frightful if mr tumnus comes back and finds us both here. ive had to pretend to be you.  and youre starting tonight - secretly. and where were you all this time?”
"a boy in the street made a beastly joke about queen susan," said prince  corin, "so i knocked him down. he ran howling into a house and his big brother came out.  so i knocked the big brother down. then they all followed me until we ran into  three old men with spears who are called the watch. so i fought the watch and they  knocked me down.
it was getting dark by now. then the watch took me along to lock me up  somewhere. so i asked them if theyd like a stoup of wine and they said they didnt mind  if they did. then i took them to a wine shop and got them some and they all sat down and  drank till they feel asleep. i thought it was time for me to be off so i came out quietly  and then i found the first boy - the one who had started all the trouble - still hanging  about. so i knocked him down again. after that i climbed up a pipe on to the roof of a house  and lay quiet till it began to get light this morning. ever since that ive been finding my  way back. i say, is there anything to drink?”
"no, i drank it," said shasta. "and now, show me how you got in. theres  not a minute to lose. youd better lie down on the sofa and pretend-but i forgot. itll be  no good with all those bruises and black eye. youll just have to tell them the truth, once  im safely away.”
"what else did you think id be telling them?" asked the prince with a  rather angry look.
"and who are you?”
"theres no time," said shasta in a frantic whisper. "im a narnian, i  believe; something northern anyway. but ive been brought up all my life in calormen. and im  escaping: across the desert; with a talking horse called bree. and now, quick! how do  i get away?”
"look," said corin. "drop from this window on to the roof of the verandah.  but you must do it lightly, on your toes, or someone will hear you. then along to your  left and you can get up to the top of that wall if youre any good at all as a climber. then  along the wall to the corner. drop onto the rubbish heap you will find outside, and there you  are.”
"thanks," said shasta, who was already sitting on the sill. the two boys  were looking into each others faces and suddenly found that they were friends.
"good-bye," said corin. "and good luck. i do hope you get safe away.”
"good-bye," said shasta. "i say, you have been having some adventures.”
"nothing to yours," said the prince. "now drop; lightlyi say," he added as  shasta dropped. "i hope we meet in archenland. go to my father king lune and tell  him youre a friend of mine. look out! i hear someone coming.”

wＷw。xiabｏok.com



CHAPTER SIX

！小＠说＃txt＄天＾堂＆
shasta among the tombs  shasta ran lightly along the roof on tiptoes. it felt hot to his bare feet.  he was only a few seconds scrambling up the wall at the far end and when he got to the  corner he found himself looking down into a narrow, smelly street, and there was a rubbish  heap against the outside of the wall just as corin had told him. before jumping down he  took a rapid glance round him to get his bearings. apparently he had now come over the  crown of the island-hill on which tashbaan is built. everything sloped away before him,  flat roofs below flat roofs, down to the towers and battlements of the citys northern  wall. beyond that was the river and beyond the river a short slope covered with gardens.  but beyond that again there was something he had never seen the like of - a great  yellowish-grey thing, flat as a calm sea, and stretching for miles. on the far side of it  were huge blue things, lumpy but with jagged edges, and some of them with white tops. "the  desert! the mountains!" thought shasta.
he jumped down on to the rubbish and began trotting along downhill as fast  as he could in the narrow lane, which soon brought him into a wider street where there  were more people. no one bothered to look at a little ragged boy running along on  bare feet. still, he was anxious and uneasy till he turned a corner and there saw the city gate  in front of him.
here he was pressed and jostled a bit, for a good many other people were  also going out; and on the bridge beyond the gate the crowd became quite a slow procession,  more like a queue than a crowd. out there, with clear running water on each side, it  was deliciously fresh after the smell and heat and noise of tashbaan.
when once shasta had reached the far end of the bridge he found the crowd  melting away; everyone seemed to be going either to the left or right along the  river bank. he went straight ahead up a road that did not appear to be much used, between  gardens. in a few paces he was alone, and a few more brought him to the top of the slope.  there he stood and stared. it was like coming to the end of the world for all the  grass stopped quite suddenly a few feet before him and the sand began: endless level sand like  on a sea shore but a bit rougher because it was never wet. the mountains, which now looked  further off than before, loomed ahead. greatly to his relief he saw, about five  minutes walk away on his left, what must certainly be the tombs, just as bree had described  them; great masses of mouldering stone shaped like gigantic bee-hive, but a little narrower.  they looked very black and grim, for the sun was now setting right behind them.
he turned his face west and trotted towards the tombs. he could not help  looking out very hard for any sign of his friends, though the setting sun shone in his  face so that he could see hardly anything. "and anyway," he thought, "of course theyll be  round on the far side of the farthest tomb, not this side where anyone might see them  from the city.”
there were about twelve tombs, each with a low arched doorway that opened  into absolute blackness. they were dotted about in no kind of order, so that it  took a long time, going round this one and going round that one, before you could be  sure that you had looked round every side of every tomb. this was what shasta had to do.  there was nobody there.
it was very quiet here out on the edge of the desert; and now the sun had  really set.
suddenly from somewhere behind him there came a terrible sound. shastas  heart gave a great jump and he had to bite his tongue to keep himself from screaming.  next moment he realized what it was: the horns of tashbaan blowing for the closing of  the gates.
"dont be a silly little coward," said shasta to himself. "why, its only  the same noise you heard this morning." but there is a great difference between a noise heard  letting you in with your friends in the morning, and a noise heard alone at nightfall,  shutting you out.
and now that the gates were shut he knew there was no chance of the others  joining him that evening. "either theyre shut up in tashbaan for the night," thought  shasta, "or else theyve gone on without me. its just the sort of thing that aravis would  do. but bree wouldnt. oh, he wouldnt. - now, would he?”
in this idea about aravis shasta was once more quite wrong. she was proud  and could be hard enough but she was as true as steel and would never have deserted a  companion, whether she liked him or not.
now that shasta knew he would have to spend the night alone (it was getting  darker every minute) he began to like the look of the place less and less. there  was something very uncomfortable about those great, silent shapes of stone. he had been  trying his hardest for a long time not to think of ghouls: but he couldnt keep it up  any longer.
"ow! ow! help!" he shouted suddenly, for at that very moment he felt  something touch his leg. i dont think anyone can be blamed for shouting if something comes  up from behind and touches him; not in such a place and at such a time, when he is  frightened already. shasta at any rate was too frightened to run. anything would be  better than being chased round and round the burial places of the ancient kings with  something he dared not look at behind him. instead, he did what was really the most sensible  thing he could do. he looked round; and his heart almost burst with relief. what had  touched him was only a cat.
the light was too bad now for shasta to see much of the cat except that it  was big and very solemn. it looked as if it might have lived for long, long years among  the tombs, alone. its eyes made you think it knew secrets it would not tell.
"puss, puss," said shasta. "i suppose youre not a talking cat.”
the cat stared at him harder than ever. then it started walking away, and  of course shasta followed it. it led him right through the tombs and out on the desert side  of them. there it sat down bolt upright with its tail curled round its feet and its face set  towards the desert and towards narnia and the north, as still as if it were watching for some  enemy. shasta lay down beside it with his back against the cat and his face towards the  tombs, because if one is nervous theres nothing like having your face towards the danger  and having something warm and solid at your back. the sand wouldnt have seemed very comfortable to you, but shasta had been sleeping on the ground for weeks  and hardly noticed it. very soon he fell asleep, though even in his dreams he went on  wondering what had happened to bree and aravis and hwin.
he was wakened suddenly by a noise he had never heard before. "perhaps it  was only a nightmare," said shasta to himself. at the same moment he noticed that the  cat had gone from his back, and he wished it hadnt. but he lay quite still without even  opening his eyes because he felt sure he would be more frightened if he sat up and  looked round at the tombs and the loneliness: just as you or i might lie still with the  clothes over our heads. but then the noise came again - a harsh, piercing cry from behind  him out of the desert. then of course he had to open his eyes and sit up.
the moon was shining brightly. the tombs - far bigger and nearer than he  had thought they would be - looked grey in the moonlight. in fact, they looked horribly  like huge people, draped in grey robes that covered their heads and faces. they were  not at all nice things to have near you when spending a night alone in a strange place. but  the noise had come from the opposite side, from the desert. shasta had to turn his back  on the tombs (he didnt like that much) and stare out across the level sand. the wild  cry rang out again.
"i hope its not more lions," thought shasta. it was in fact not very like  the lions roars he had heard on the night when they met hwin and aravis, and was really the  cry of a jackal. but of course shasta did not know this. even if he had known, he  would not have wanted very much to meet a jackal.
the cries rang out again and again. "theres more than one of them,  whatever they are,”
thought shasta. "and theyre coming nearer.”
i suppose that if he had been an entirely sensible boy he would have gone  back through the tombs nearer to the river where there were houses, and wild beasts  would be less likely to come. but then there were (or he thought there were) the ghouls.  to go back through the tombs would mean going past those dark openings in the tombs;  and what might come out of them? it may have been silly, but shasta felt he would  rather risk the wild beasts. then, as the cries came nearer and nearer, he began to change  his mind.
he was just going to run for it when suddenly, between him and the desert,  a huge animal bounded into view. as the moon was behind it, it looked quite black, and  shasta did not know what it was, except that it had a very big, shaggy head and went on  four legs. it did not seem to have noticed shasta, for it suddenly stopped, turned its head  towards the desert and let out a roar which re-echoed through the tombs and seemed to  shake the sand under shastas feet. the cries of the other creatures suddenly stoppd  and he thought he could hear feet scampering away. then the great beast turned to examine  shasta.
"its a lion, i know its a lion," thought shasta. "im done. i wonder will  it hurt much. i wish it was over. i wonder does anything happen to people after theyre  dead. o-o-oh!
here it comes!" and he shut his eyes and his teeth tight.
but instead of teeth and claws he only felt something warm lying down at  his feet. and when he opened his eyes he said, "why, its not nearly as big as i thought!  its only half the size. no, it isnt even quarter the size. i do declare its only the  cat!! i must have dreamed all that about its being as big as a horse.”
and whether he really had been dreaming or not, what was now lying at his  feet, and staring him out of countenance with its big, green, unwinking eyes, was the  cat; though certainly one of the largest cats he had ever seen.
"oh, puss," gasped shasta. "i am so glad to see you again. ive been having  such horrible dreams." and he at once lay down again, back to back with the cat as they  had been at the beginning of the night. the warmth from it spread all over him.
"ill never do anything nasty to a cat again as long as i live," said  shasta, half to the cat and half to himself. "i did once, you know. i threw stones at a half- starved mangy old stray. hey! stop that." for the cat had turned round and given him a  scratch. "none of that," said shasta. "it isnt as if you could understand what im saying."  then he dozed off.
next morning when he woke, the cat was gone, the sun was already up, and  the sand hot.
shasta, very thirsty, sat up and rubbed his eyes. the desert was blindingly  white and, though there was a murmur of noises from the city behind him, where he sat  everything was perfectly still. when he looked a little left and west, so that the sun  was not in his eyes, he could see the mountains on the far side of the desert, so sharp  and clear that they looked only a stones throw away. he particularly noticed one blue height  that divided into two peaks at the top and decided that it must be mount pire. "thats  our direction, judging by what the raven said," he thought, "so ill just make sure of it,  so as not to waste any time when the others turn up." so he made a good, deep straight  furrow with his foot pointing exactly to mount pire.
the next job, clearly, was to get something to eat and drink. shasta  trotted back through the tombs - they looked quite ordinary now and he wondered how he could  ever have been afraid of them - and down into the cultivated land by the rivers  side. there were a few people about but not very many, for the city gates had been open  several hours and the early morning crowds had already gone in. so he had no diffculty in  doing a little "raiding" (as bree called it). it involved a climb over a garden wall and  the results were three oranges, a melon, a fig or two, and a pomegranate. after that, he  went down to the river bank, but not too near the bridge, and had a drink. the water was so  nice that he took off his hot, dirty clothes and had a dip; for of course shasta, having  lived on the shore all his life, had learned to swim almost as soon as he had learned to  walk. when he came out he lay on the grass looking across the water at tashbaan - all the  splendour and strength and glory of it. but that made him remember the dangers of it too.  he suddenly realized that the others might have reached the tombs while he was bathing  ("and gone on without me, as likely as not"), so he dressed in a fright and tore back  at such a speed that he was all hot and thirsty when he arrived and so the good of his  bathe was gone.
like most days when you are alone and waiting for something this day seemed  about a hundred hours long. he had plenty to think of, of course, but sitting  alone, just thinking, is pretty slow. he thought a good deal about the narnians and especially  about corin. he wondered what had happened when they discovered that the boy who had been  lying on the sofa and hearing all their secret plans wasnt really corin at all. it  was very unpleasant to think of all those nice people imagining him a traitor.
but as the sun slowly, slowly climbed up to the top of the sky and then  slowly, slowly began going downwards to the west, and no one came and nothing at all  happened, he began to get more and more anxious. and of course he now realized that when  they arranged to wait for one another at the tombs no one had said anything  about how long.
he couldnt wait here for the rest of his life! and soon it would be dark  again, and he would have another night just like last night. a dozen different plans went  through his head, all wretched ones, and at last he fixed on the worst plan of all. he  decided to wait till it was dark and then go back to the river and steal as many melons as  he could carry and set out for mount pire alone, trusting for his direction to the line he  had drawn that morning in the sand. it was a crazy idea and if he had read as many books  as you have about journeys over deserts he would never have dreamed of it. but shasta  had read no books at all.
before the sun set something did happen. shasta was sitting in the shadow  of one of the tombs when he looked up and saw two horses coming towards him. then his  heart gave a great leap, for he recognized them as bree and hwin. but the next moment  his heart went down into his toes again. there was no sign of aravis. the horses were  being led by a strange man, an armed man pretty handsomely dressed like an upper  slave in a great family. bree and hwin were no longer got up like pack-horses, but saddled  and bridled.
and what could it all mean? "its a trap," thought shasta. "somebody has  caught aravis and perhaps theyve tortured her and shes given the whole thing away. they  want me to jump out and run up and speak to bree and then ill be caught too! and yet  if i dont, i may be losing my only chance to meet the others. oh i do wish i knew what  had happened." and he skulked behind the tomb, looking out every few minutes,  and wondering which was the least dangerous thing to do.

www.56ｗen．ＣＯＭ



CHAPTER SEVEN

www.xiabook.com
aravis in tashbaan  what had really happened was this. when aravis saw shasta hurried away by  the narnians and found herself alone with two horses who (very wisely) wouldnt  say a word, she never lost her head even for a moment. she grabbed brees halter and  stood still, holding both the horses; and though her heart was beating as hard as a  hammer, she did nothing to show it. as soon as the narnian lords had passed she tried to  move on again.
but before she could take a step, another crier ("bother all these people"  thought aravis)
was heard shouting out, "way, way, way! way for the tarkheena lasaraleen!"  and immediately, following the crier, came four armed slaves and then four  bearers carrying a litter which was all a-flutter with silken curtains and all a-jingle with  silver bells and which scented the whole street with perfumes and flowers. after the litter,  female slaves in beautiful clothes, and then a few grooms, runners, pages, and the like.  and now aravis made her first mistake.
she knew lasaraleen quite well - almost as if they had been at school  together - because they had often stayed in the same houses and been to the same parties. and  aravis couldnt help looking up to see what lasaraleen looked like now that she  was married and a very great person indeed.
it was fatal. the eyes of the two girls met. and immediately lasaraleen sat  up in the litter and burst out at the top of her voice.
"aravis! what on earth are you doing here? your father-”
there was not a moment to lose. without a seconds delay aravis let go the  horses, caught the edge of the litter, swung herself up beside lasaraleen and  whispered furiously in her ear.
"shut up! do you hear! shut up. you must hide me. tell your people-”
"but darling-" began lasaraleen in the same loud voice. (she didnt in the  least mind making people stare; in fact she rather liked it.)
"do what i tell you or ill never speak to you again," hissed aravis.  "please, please be quick, las. its frightfully important. tell your people to bring those two  horses along.
pull all the curtains of the litter and get away somewhere where i cant be  found. and do hurry.”
"all right, darling," said lasaraleen in her lazy voice. "here. two of you  take the tarkheenas horses." (this was to the slaves.) "and now home. i say,  darling, do you think we really want the curtains drawn on a day like this? i mean to say-”
but aravis had already drawn the curtains, enclosing lasaraleen and herself  in a rich and scented, but rather stuffy, kind of tent.
"i mustnt be seen," "she said. "my father doesnt know im here. im  running away.”
"my dear, how perfectly thrilling," said lasaraleen. "im dying to hear all  about it.
darling, youre sitting on my dress. do you mind? thats better. it is a  new one. do you like it? i got it at-”
"oh, las, do be serious," said aravis. "where is my father?”
"didnt you know?" said lasaraleen. "hes here, of course. he came to town  yesterday and is asking about you everywhere. and to think of you and me being here  together and his not knowing anything about it! its the funniest thing i ever heard."  and she went off into giggles. she always had been a terrible giggler, as aravis now  remembered.
"it isnt funny at all," she said. "its dreadfully serious. where can you  hide me?”
"no difficulty at all, my dear girl," said lasaraleen. "ill take you home.  my husbands away and no one will see you. phew! its not much fun with the curtains  drawn. i want to see people. theres no point in having a new dress on if ones to go about  shut up like this.”
"i hope no one heard you when you shouted out to me like that," said  aravis.
"no, no, of course, darling," said lasaraleen absentmindedly. "but you  havent even told me yet what you think of the dress.”
"another thing," said aravis. "you must tell your people to treat those two  horses very respectfully. thats part of the secret. theyre really talking horses from  narnia.”
"fancy!" said lasaraleen. "how exciting! and oh, darling, have you seen the  barbarian queen from narnia? shes staying in tashbaan at present. they say prince  rabadash is madly in love with her. there have been the most wonderful parties and  hunts and things all this last fortnight. i cant see that shes so very pretty myself. but  some of the narnian men are lovely. i was taken out on a river party the day before yesterday,  and i was wearing my-”
"how shall we prevent your people telling everyone that youve got a  visitor - dressed like a beggars brat - in your house? it might so easily get round to my  father.”
"now dont keep on fussing, theres a dear," said lasaraleen. "well get  you some proper clothes in a moment. and here we are!”
the bearers had stopped and the litter was being lowered. when the curtains  had been drawn aravis found that she was in a courtyard-garden very like the one  that shasta had been taken into a few minutes earlier in another part of the city.  lasaraleen would have gone indoors at once but aravis reminded her in a frantic whisper to say  something to the slaves about not telling anyone of their mistresss strange visitor.
"sorry, darling, it had gone right out of my head," said lasareleen. "here.  all of you.
and you, doorkeeper. no one is to be let out of the house today. and anyone  i catch talking about this young lady will be first beaten to death and then burned  alive and after that be kept on bread and water for six weeks. there.”
although lasaraleen had said she was dying to hear araviss story, she  showed no sign of really wanting to hear it at all. she was, in fact, much better at talking  than at listening.
she insisted on aravis having a long and luxurious bath (calormene baths  are famous)
and then dressing her up in the finest clothes before she would let her  explain anything.
the fuss she made about choosing the dresses nearly drove aravis mad. she  remembered now that lasaraleen had always been like that, interested in clothes and  parties and gossip. aravis had always been more interested in bows and arrows and  horses and dogs and swimming. you will guess that each thought the other silly. but when at  last they were both seated after a meal (it was chiefly of the whipped cream and  jelly and fruit and ice sort) in a beautiful pillared room (which aravis would have liked  better if lasaraleens spoiled pet monkey hadnt been climbing about it all the time)  lasaraleen at last asked her why she was running away from home.
when aravis had finished telling her story, lasaraleen said, "but, darling,  why dont you marry ahoshta tarkaan? everyones crazy about him. my husband says he is  beginning to be one of the greatest men in calormen. he has just been made grand  vizier now old axartha has died. didnt you know?”
"i dont care. i cant stand the sight of him," said aravis.
"but, darling, only think! three palaces, and one of them that beautiful  one down on the lake at ilkeen. positively ropes of pearls, im told. baths of asses milk.  and youd see such a lot of me.”
"he can keep his pearls and palaces as far as im concerned," said aravis.
"you always were a queer girl, aravis," said lasaraleen. "what more do you  want?”
in the end, however, aravis managed to make her friend believe that she was  in earnest and even to discuss plans. there would be no difficulty now about getting  the two horses out of the north gate and then on to the tombs. no one would stop or  question a groom in fine clothes leading a war horse and a ladys saddle horse down to the  river, and lasaraleen had plenty of grooms to send. it wasnt so easy to decide what  to do about aravis herself. she suggested that she could be carried out in the litter  with the curtains drawn. but lasaraleen told her that litters were only used in the city and  the sight of one going out through the gate would be certain to lead to questions.
when they had talked for a long time - and it was all the longer because  aravis found it hard to keep her friend to the point-at last lasaraleen clapped her hands  and said, "oh, i have an idea. there is one way of getting out of the city without using the  gates. the tisrocs garden (may he live for ever!) runs right down to the water and  there is a little water-door. only for the palace people of course - but then you know, dear  (here she tittered a little) we almost are palace people. i say, it is lucky for you  that you came to me. the dear tisroc (may he live for ever!) is so kind. were asked to the  palace almost every day and it is like a second home. i love all the dear princes and  princesses and i positively adore prince rabadash. i might run in and see any of the palace  ladies at any hour of the day or night. why shouldnt i slip in withyou, after dark, and  let you out by the water-door? there are always a few punts and things tied up outside it.  and even if we were caught-”
"all would be lost," said aravis.
"oh darling, dont get so excited," said lasaraleen. "i was going to say,  even if we were caught everyone would only say it was one of my mad jokes. im getting  quite well known for them. only the other day- do listen, dear, this is frightfully  funny-”
"i meant, all would be lost for me," said aravis a little sharply.
"oh - ah - yes - i do see what you mean, darling. well, can you think of  any better plan?”
aravis couldnt, and answered, "no. well have to risk it. when can we  start?”
"oh, not tonight," said lasaraleen. "of course not tonight. theres a great  feast on tonight (i must start getting my hair done for it in a few minutes) and the whole  place will be a blaze of lights. and such a crowd too! it would have to be tomorrow night.”
this was bad news for aravis, but she had to make the best of it. the  afternoon passed very slowly and it was a relief when lasaraleen went out to the banquet,  for aravis was very tired of her giggling and her talk about dresses and parties, weddings  and engagements and scandals. she went to bed early and that part she did  enjoy: it was so nice to have pillows and sheets again.
but the next day passed very slowly. lasaraleen wanted to go back on the  whole arrangement and kept on telling aravis that narnia was a country of  perpetual snow and ice inhabited by demons and sorcerers, and she was mad to think of going  there. "and with a peasant boy, too!" said lasaraleen. "darling, think of it! its not  nice." aravis had thought of it a good deal, but she was so tired of lasaraleens silliness  by now that, for the first time, she began to think that travelling with shasta was really  rather more fun than fashionable life in tashbaan. so she only replied, "you forget that  ill be nobody, just like him, when we get to narnia. and anyway, i promised.”
"and to think," said lasaraleen, almost crying, "that if only you had sense  you could be the wife of a grand vizier!" aravis went away to have a private word with  the horses.
"you must go with a groom a little before sunset down to the tombs," she  said. "no more of those packs. youll be saddled and bridled again. but therell have  to be food in hwins saddle-bags and a full water-skin behind yours, bree. the man has  orders to let you both have a good long drink at the far side of the bridge.”
"and then, narnia and the north!" whispered bree. "but what if shasta is  not at the tombs.”
"wait for him of course," said aravis. "i hope youve been quite  comfortable.”
"never better stabled in my life," said bree. "but if the husband of that  tittering tarkheena friend of yours is paying his head groom to get the best oats,  then i think the head groom is cheating him.”
aravis and lasaraleen had supper in the pillared room.
about two hours later they were ready to start. aravis was dressed to look  like a superior slave-girl in a great house and wore a veil over her face. they had agreed  that if any questions were asked lasaraleen would pretend that aravis was a slave she  was taking as a present to one of the princesses.
the two girls went out on foot. a very few minutes brought them to the  palace gates.
here there were of course soldiers on guard but the officer knew lasaraleen  quite well and called his men to attention and saluted. they passed at once into the  hall of black marble. a fair number of courtiers, slaves and others were still moving  about here but this only made the two girls less conspicuous. they passed on into the hall  of pillars and then into the hall of statues and down the colonnade, passing the great  beatencopper  
doors of the throne room. it was all magnificent beyond description; what  they could see of it in the dim light of the lamps.
presently they came out into the garden-court which sloped downhill in a  number of terraces. on the far side of that they came to the old palace. it had  already grown almost quite dark and they now found themselves in a maze of corridors lit only by  occasional torches fixed in brackets to the walls. lasaraleen halted at a place where  you had to go either left or right.
"go on, do go on," whispered aravis, whose heart was beating terribly and  who still felt that her father might run into them at any corner.
"im just wondering..." said lasaraleen. "im not absolutely sure which way  we go from here. i think its the left. yes, im almost sure its the left. what fun  this is!”
they took the left hand way and found themselves in a passage that was  hardly lighted at all and which soon began going down steps.
"its all right," said lasaraleen. "im sure were right now. i remember  these steps." but at that moment a moving light appeared ahead. a second later there appeared  from round a distant corner, the dark shapes of two men walking backwards and carrying  tall candles.
and of course it is only before royalties that people walk backwards.  aravis felt lasaraleen grip her arm - that sort of sudden grip which is almost a pinch  and which means that the person who is gripping you is very frightened indeed. aravis  thought it odd that lasaraleen should be so afraid of the tisroc if he were really  such a friend of hers, but there was no time to go on thinking. lasaraleen was hurrying her  back to the top of the steps, on tiptoes, and groping wildly along the wall.
"heres a door," she whispered. "quick.”
they went in, drew the door very softly behind them, and found themselves  in pitch darkness. aravis could hear by lasaraleens breathing that she was  terrified.
"tash preserve us!" whispered lasaraleen. "what shall we do if he comes in  here. can we hide?”
there was a soft carpet under their feet. they groped forward into the room  and blundered on to a sofa.
"lets lie down behind it," whimpered lasaraleen. "oh, i do wish we hadnt  come.”
there was just room between the sofa and the curtained wall and the two  girls got down.
lasaraleen managed to get the better position and was completely covered.  the upper part of araviss face stuck out beyond the sofa, so that if anyone came  into that room with a light and happened to look in exactly the right place they would see her.  but of course, because she was wearing a veil, what they saw would not at once look like a  forehead and  
a pair of eyes. aravis shoved desperately to try to make lasaraleen give  her a little more room. but lasaraleen, now quite selfish in her panic, fought back and  pinched her feet.
they gave it up and lay still, panting a little. their own breath semed  dreadfully noisy, but there was no other noise.
"is it safe?" said aravis at last in the tiniest possible whisper.
"i - i - think so," began lasaraleen. "but my poor nerves -" and then came  the most terrible noise they could have heard at that moment: the noise of the door  opening. and then came light. and because aravis couldnt get her head any further in  behind the sofa, she saw everything.
first came the two slaves (deaf and dumb, as aravis rightly guessed, and  therefore used at the most secret councils) walking backwards and carrying the candles.  they took up their stand one at each end of the sofa. this was a good thing, for of  course it was now harder for anyone to see aravis once a slave was in front of her and she  was looking between his heels. then came an old man, very fat, wearing a curious  pointed cap by which she immediately knew that he was the tisroc. the least of the jewels  with which he was covered was worth more than all the clothes and weapons of the  narnian lords put together: but he was so fat and such a mass of frills and pleats and  bobbles and buttons and tassels and talismans that aravis couldnt help thinking the narnian  fashions (at any rate for men) looked nicer. after him came a tall young man with a  feathered and jewelled turban on his head and an ivory-sheathed scimitar at his side. he  seemed very excited and his eyes and teeth flashed fiercely in the candlelight. last of  all came a little hump-backed, wizened old man in whom she recognized with a shudder the new  grand vizier and her own betrothed husband, ahoshta tarkaan himself.
as soon as all three had entered the room and the door was shut, the tisroc  seated himself on the divan with a sigh of contentment, the young man took his  place, standing before him, and the grand vizier got down on his knees and elbows and laid  his face flat on the carpet.





CHAPTER EIGHT

。小%说^t*xt-天.堂
in the house of the tisroc  "oh-my-father-and-oh-the-delight-of-my-eyes," began the young man,  muttering the words very quickly and sulkily and not at all as if the tisroc were the  delight of his eyes.
"may you live for ever, but you have utterly destroyed me. if you had given  me the swiftest of the galleys at sunrise when i first saw that the ship of the  accursed barbarians was gone from her place i would perhaps have overtaken them. but you  persuaded me to send first and see if they had not merely moved round the point into better  anchorage.
and now the whole day has been wasted. and they are gone - gone - out of my  reach!
the false jade, the-" and here he added a great many descriptions of queen  susan which would not look at all nice in print. for of course this young man was  prince rabadash and of course the false jade was susan of narnia.
"compose yourself, o my son," said the tisroc. "for the departure of guests  makes a wound that is easily healed in the heart of a judicious host.”
"but i want her," cried the prince. "i must have her. i shall die if i do  not get her- false, proud, black-hearted daughter of a dog that she is! i cannot sleep and my  food has no savour and my eyes are darkened because of her beauty. i must have the  barbarian queen.”
"how well it was said by a gifted poet," observed the vizier, raising his  face (in a somewhat dusty condition) from the carpet, "that deep draughts from the  fountain of reason are desirable in order to extinguish the fire of youthful love.”
this seemed to exasperate the prince. "dog," he shouted, directing a series  of well-aimed kicks at the hindquarters of the vizier, "do not dare to quote the poets to  me. i have had maxims and verses flung at me all day and i can endure them no more." i am  afraid aravis did not feel at all sorry for the vizier.
the tisroc was apparently sunk in thought, but when, after a long pause, he  noticed what was happening, he said tranquilly:  "my son, by all means desist from kicking the venerable and enlightened  vizier: for as a costly jewel retains its value even if hidden in a dung-hill, so old age  and discretion are to be respected even in the vile persons of our subjects. desist therefore,  and tell us what you desire and propose.”
"i desire and propose, o my father," said rabadash, "that you immediately  call out your invincible armies and invade the thrice-accursed land of narnia and waste  it with fire and sword and add it to your illimitable empire, killing their high king and  all of his blood except the queen susan. for i must have her as my wife, though she shall  learn a sharp lesson first.”
"understand, o my son," said the tisroc, "that no words you can speak will  move me to open war against narnia.”
"if you were not my father, o ever-living tisroc, " said the prince,  grinding his teeth, "i should say that was the word of a coward.”
"and if you were not my son, o most inflammable rabadash," replied his  father, "your life would be short and your death slow when you had said it." (the cool,  placid voice in which he spoke these words made araviss blood run cold.)
"but why, o my father," said the prince - this time in a much more  respectful voice, "why should we think twice about punishing narnia any more than about hanging an  idle slave or sending a worn-out horse to be made into dogsmeat? it is not the fourth  size of one of your least provinces. a thousand spears could conquer it in five weeks. it  is an unseemly blot on the skirts of your empire.”
"most undoubtedly," said the tisroc. "these little barbarian countries that  call themselves free (which is as much as to say, idle, disordered, and unprofitable) are  hateful to the gods and to all persons of discernment.”
"then why have we suffered such a land as narnia to remain thus long  unsubdued?”
"know, o enlightened prince," said the grand vizier, "that until the year  in which your exalted father began his salutary and unending reign, the land of narnia  was covered with ice and snow and was moreover ruled by a most powerful enchantress.”
"this i know very well, o loquacious vizier," answered the prince. "but i  know also that the enchantress is dead. and the ice and snow have vanished, so that narnia  is now wholesome, fruitful, and delicious.”
"and this change, o most learned prince, has doubtless been brought to pass  by the powerful incantations of those wicked persons who now call themselves kings  and queens of narnia.”
"i am rather of the opinion," said rabadash, "that it has come about by the  alteration of the stars and the operation of natural causes.”
"all this," said the tisroc, "is a question for the disputations of learned  men. i will never believe that so great an alteration, and the killing of the old  enchantress, were effected without the aid of strong magic. and such things are to be expected in that  land, which is chiefly inhabited by demons in the shape of beasts that talk like men, and  monsters that are half man and half beast. it is commonly reported that the high king of  narnia (whom may the gods utterly reject) is supported by a demon of hideous aspect and  irresistible maleficence who appears in the shape of a lion. therefore the attacking of  narnia is a dark and doubtful enterprise, and i am determined not to put my hand out  farther than i can draw it back.”
"how blessed is calormen," said the vizier, popping up his face again, "on  whose ruler the gods have been pleased to bestow prudence and circumspection! yet as  the irrefutable and sapient tisroc has said it is very grievous to be constrained to keep  our hands off such a dainty dish as narnia. gifted was that poet who said -" but at this  point ahoshta noticed an impatient movement of the princes toe and became suddenly  silent.
"it is very grievous," said the tisroc in his deep, quiet voice. "every  morning the sun is darkened in my eyes, and every night my sleep is the less refreshing,  because i remember that narnia is still free.”
"o my father," said rabadash. "how if i show you a way by which you can  stretch out your arm to take narnia and yet draw it back unharmed if the attempt prove  unfortunate?”
"if you can show me that, o rabadash," said the tisroc, "you will be the  best of sons.”
"hear then, 0 father. this very night and in this hour i will take but two  hundred horse and ride across the desert. and it shall seem to all men that you know  nothing of my going. on the second morning i shall be at the gates of king lunes castle  of anvard in archenland. they are at peace with us and unprepared and i shall take  anvard before they have bestirred themselves. then i will ride through the pass above  anvard and down through narnia to cair paravel. the high king will not be there; when i  left them he was already preparing a raid against the giants on his northern border. i shall  find cair paravel, most likely with open gates, and ride in. i shall exercise  prudence and courtesy and spill as little narnian blood as i can. and what then remains but to  sit there till the splendour hyaline puts in, with queen susan on board, catch my strayed bird  as she sets foot ashore, swing her into the saddle, and then, ride, ride, ride back to  anvard?”
"but is it not probable, o my son," said the tisroc, "that at the taking of  the woman either king edmund or you will lose his life?”
"they will be a small company," said rabadash, "and i will order ten of my  men to disarm and bind him: restraining my vehement desire for his blood so that  there shall be no deadly cause of war between you and the high king.”
"and how if the splendour hyaline is at cair paravel before you?”
"i do not look for that with these winds, o my father.”
"and lastly, o my resourceful son," said the tisroc, "you have made clear  how all this might give you the barbarian woman, but not how it helps me to the over- throwing of narnia.”
"o my father, can it have escaped you that though i and my horsemen will  come and go through narnia like an arrow from a bow, yet we shall have anvard for ever?  and when you hold anvard you sit in the very gate of narnia, and your garrison in  anvard can be increased by little and little till it is a great host.”
"it is spoken with understanding and foresight. but how do i draw back my  arm if all this miscarries?”
"you shall say that i, did it without your knowledge and against your will,  and without your blessing, being constrained by the violence of my love and the  impetuosity of youth.”
"and how if the high king then demands that we send back the barbarian  woman, his sister?”
"o my father, be assured that he will not. for though the fancy of a woman  has rejected this marriage, the high king peter is a man of prudence and understanding  who will in no way wish to lose the high honour and advantage of being allied to our  house and seeing his nephew and grand nephew on the throne of calormen.”
"he will not see that if i live for ever as is no doubt your wish," said  the tisroc in an even drier voice than usual.
"and also, o my father and o the delight of my eyes," said the prince,  after a moment of awkward silence, "we shall write letters as if from the queen to say that  she loves me and has no desire to return to narnia. for it is well known that women are as  changeable as weathercocks. and even if they do not wholly believe the letters, they will  not dare to come to tashbaan in arms to fetch her.”
"o enlightened vizier," said the tisroc, "bestow your wisdom upon us  concerning this strange proposal.”
"o eternal tisroc," answered ahosta, "the strength of paternal affection is  not unknown to me and i have often heard that sons are in the eyes of their fathers  more precious than carbuncles. how then shall i dare freely to unfold to you my mind in a  matter which may imperil the life of this exalted prince?”
"undoubtedly you will dare," replied the tisroc.
"because you will find that the dangers of not doing so are at least  equally great.”
"to hear is to obey," moaned the wretched man. "know then, o most  reasonable tisroc, in the first place, that the danger of the prince is not altogether so  great as might appear.
for the gods have withheld from the barbarians the light of discretion, as  that their poetry is not, like ours, full of choice apophthegms and useful maxims, but is all  of love and war. therefore nothing will appear to them more noble and admirable than  such a mad enterprise as this of ow!" for the prince, at the word "mad", had kicked  him again.
"desist, o my son," said the tisroc. "and you, estimable vizier, whether he  desists or not, by no means allow the flow of your eloquence to be interrupted. for  nothing is more suitable to persons of gravity and decorum than to endure minor  inconveniences with constancy.”
"to hear is to obey," said the vizier, wriggling himself round a little so  as to get his hinder parts further away from rabadashs toe. "nothing, i say, will seem  as pardonable, if not estimable, in their eyes as this - er - hazardous attempt,  especially because it is undertaken for the love of a woman. therefore, if the prince by misfortune  fell into their hands, they would assuredly not kill him. nay, it may even be, that though  he failed to  
carry off the queen, yet the sight of his great valour and of the extremity  of his passion might incline her heart to him.”
"that is a good point, old babbler," said rabadash. "very good, however it  came into your ugly head.”
"the praise of my masters is the light of my eyes," said ahoshta. "and  secondly, o tisroc, whose reign must and shall be interminable, i think that with the  aid of the gods it is very likely that anvard will fall into the princes hands. and if so, we  have narnia by the throat.”
there was a long pause and the room became so silent that the two girls  hardly dared to breathe. at last the tisroc spoke.
"go, my son," he said. "and do as you have said. but expect no help nor  countenance from me. i will not avenge you if you are killed and i will not deliver you  if the barbarians cast you into prison. and if, either in success or failure, you  shed a drop more than you need of narnian noble blood and open war arises from it, my favour  shall never fall upon you again and your next brother shall have your place in  calormen. now go. be swift, secret, and fortunate. may the strength of tash the inexorable, the  irresistible be in your sword and lance.”
"to hear is to obey," cried rabadash, and after kneeling for a moment to  kiss his fathers hands he rushed from the room. greatly to the disappointment of aravis, who  was now horribly cramped, the tisroc and vizier remained.
"o vizier," said the tisroc, "is it certain that no living soul knows of  this council we three have held here tonight?”
"o my master," said ahoshta, "it is not possible that any should know. for  that very reason i proposed, and you in your wisdom agreed, that we should meet here  in the old palace where no council is ever held and none of the household has any  occasion to come.”
"it is well," said the tisroc. "if any man knew, i would see to it that he  died before an hour had passed. and do you also, o prudent vizier, forget it. i sponge  away from my own heart and from yours all knowledge of the princes plans. he is gone  without my knowledge or my consent, i know not whither, because of his violence and  the rash and disobedient disposition of youth. no man will be more astonished than you  and i to hear that anvard is in his hands.”
"to hear is to obey," said ahoshta.
"that is why you will never think even in your secret heart that i am the  hardest hearted of fathers who thus send my first-born son on an errand so likely to be his  death; pleasing as it must be to you who do not love the prince. for 1 see into the bottom  of your mind.”
"o impeccable tisroc," said the vizier. "in comparison with you i love  neither the prince nor my own life nor bread nor water nor the light of the sun.”
"your sentiments," said the tisroc, "are elevated and correct. i also love  none of these things in comparison with the glory and strength of my throne. if the  prince succeeds, we have archenland, and perhaps hereafter narnia. if he fails - i have  eighteen other sons and rabadash, after the manner of the eldest sons of kings, was beginning  to be dangerous. more than five tisrocs in tashbaan have died before their time  because their eldest sons, enlightened princes, grew tired of waiting for their throne.  he had better cool his blood abroad than boil it in inaction here. and now, o excellent  vizier, the excess of my paternal anxiety inclines me to sleep. command the musicians to my  chamber. but before you lie down, call back the pardon we wrote for the third cook. i  feel within me the manifest prognostics of indigestion.”
"to hear is to obey," said the grand vizier. he crawled backwards on all  fours to the door, rose, bowed, and went out. even then the tisroc remained seated in  silence on the divan till aravis almost began to be afraid that he had dropped asleep. but  at last with a great creaking and sighing he heaved up his enormous body, signed to the  slaves to precede him with the lights, and went out. the door closed behind him, the  room was once more totally dark, and the two girls could breathe freely again.





CHAPTER NINE

小~说~t.xt`天~堂
across the desert  "hove dreadful! how perfectly dreadful!" whimpered lasaraleen. "oh darling,  i am so frightened. im shaking all over. feel me.”
"come on," said aravis, who was trembling herself. "theyve gone back to  the new palace. once were out of this room were safe enough. but its wasted a  terrible time. get me down to that water-gate as quick as you can.”
"darling, how can you?" squeaked lasaraleen. "i cant do anything - not  now. my poor nerves! no: we must just lie still a bit and then go back.”
"why back?" asked aravis.
"oh, you dont understand. youre so unsympathetic," said lasaraleen,  beginning to cry.
aravis decided it was no occasion for mercy.
"look here!" she said, catching lasaraleen and giving her a good shake. "if  you say another word about going back, and if you dont start taking me to that  water-gate at once  
- do you know what ill do? ill rush out into that passage and scream.  then well both be caught.”
"but we shall both be k-k-killed!" said lasaraleen. "didnt you hear what  the tisroc (may he live for ever) said?”
"yes, and id sooner be killed than married to ahoshta. so come on.”
"oh you are unkind," said lasaraleen. "and i in such a state!”
but in the end she had to give in to aravis. she led the way down the steps  they had already descended, and along another corridor and so finally out into the  open air. they were now in the palace garden which sloped down in terraces to the city  wall. the moon shone brightly. one of the drawbacks about adventures is that when you come  to the most beautiful places you are often too anxious and hurried to appreciate them;  so that aravis (though she remembered them years later) had only a vague impression of  grey lawns, quietly bubbling fountains, and the long black shadows of cypress trees.
when they re"ached the very bottom and the wall rose frowning above them,  lasaraleen was shaking so that she could not unbolt the gate. aravis did it. there, at  last, was the river, full of reflected moonlight, and a little landing stage and a few  pleasure boats.
"good-bye," said aravis, "and thank you. im sorry if ive been a pig. but  think what im flying from!”
"oh aravis darling," said lasaraleen. "wont you change your mind? now that  youve seen what a very great man ahoshta is!”
"great man!" said aravis. "a hideous grovelling slave who flatters when  hes kicked but treasures it all up and hopes to get his own back by egging on that  horrible tisroc to plot his sons death. faugh! id sooner marry my fathers scullion than a  creature like that.”
"oh aravis, aravis! how can you say such dreadful things; and about the  tisroc (may he live for ever) too. it must be right if hes going to do it!”
"good-bye," said aravis, "and i thought your dresses lovely. and i think  your house is lovely too. im sure youll have a lovely life - though it wouldnt suit  me. close the door softly behind me.”
she tore herself away from her friends affectionate embraces, stepped into  a punt, cast off, and a moment later was out in midstream with a huge real moon overhead  and a huge reflected moon down, deep down, in the river. the air was fresh and cool  and as she drew near the farther bank she heard the hooting of an owl. "ah! thats better!"  thought aravis. she had always lived in the country and had hated every minute of  her time in tashbaan.
when she stepped ashore she found herself in darkness for the rise of the  ground, and the trees, cut off the moonlight. but she managed to find the same road that  shasta had found, and came just as he had done to the end of. the grass and the  beginning of the sand, and looked (like him) to her left and saw the big, black tombs. and  now at last, brave girl though she was, her heart quailed. supposing the others werent  there!
supposing the ghouls were! but she stuck out her chin (and a little bit of  her tongue too)
and went straight towards them.
but before she had reached them she saw bree and hwin and the groom.
"you can go back to your mistress now," said aravis (quite forgetting that  he couldnt, until the city gates opened next morning). "here is money for your pains.”
"to hear is to obey," said the groom, and at once set off at a remarkable  speed in the direction of the city. there was no need to tell him to make haste: he also  had been thinking a good deal about ghouls.
for the next few seconds aravis was busy kissing the noses and patting the  necks of hwin and bree just as if they were quite ordinary horses.
"and here comes shasta! thanks be to the lion!" said bree.
aravis looked round, and there, right enough, was shasta who had come out  of hiding the moment he saw the groom going away.
"and now," said aravis. "theres not a moment to lose." and in hasty words  she told them about rabadashs expedition.
"treacherous hounds!" said bree, shaking his mane and stamping with his  hoof. "an attack in time of peace, without defiance sent! but well grease his oats  for him. well be there before he is.”
"can we?" said aravis, swinging herself into hwins saddle. shasta wished  he could mount like that.
"brooh-hoo!" snorted bree. "up you get, shasta. can we! and with a good  start too!”
"he said he was going to start at once," said aravis.
"thats how humans talk," said bree. "but you dont get a company of two  hundred horse and horsemen watered and victualled and armed and saddled and started all  in a minute.
now: whats our direction? due north?
"no," said shasta. "i know about that. ive drawn a line. ill explain  later. bear a bit to our left, both you horses. ah here it is!”
"now," said bree. "all that about galloping for a day and a night, like in  stories, cant really be done. it must be walk and trot: but brisk trots and short walks.  and whenever we walk you two humans can slip off and walk too. now. are you ready, hwin?  off we go. narnia and the north!”
at first it was delightful. the night had now been going on for so many  hours that the sand had almost finished giving back all the sun-heat it had received  during the day, and the air was cool, fresh, and clear. under the moonlight the sand, in every  direction and as far as they could see, gleamed as if it were smooth water or a great silver  tray. except for the noise of brees and hwins hoofs there was not a sound to be heard.  shasta would nearly have fallen asleep if he had not had to dismount and walk every now  and then.
this seemed to last for hours. then there came a time when there was no  longer any moon. they seemed to ride in the dead darkness for hours and hours. and  after that there came a moment when shasta noticed that he could see brees neck and head in  front of him a little more clearly than before; and slowly, very slowly, he began to  notice the vast grey flatness on every side. it looked absolutely dead, like something in a  dead world; and shasta felt quite terribly tired and noticed that he was getting cold  and that his lips were dry. and all the time the squeak of the leather, the jingle of the  bits, and the noise of the hoofs-not propputtypropputty as it would be on a hard road, but  thubbudythubbudy on the dry sand.
at last, after hours of riding, far away on his right there came a single  long streak of paler grey, low down on the horizon. then a streak of red. it was the morning at  last, but without a single bird to sing about it. he was glad of the walking bits  now, for he was colder than ever.
then suddenly the sun rose and everything changed in a moment. the grey  sand turned yellow and twinkled as if it was strewn with diamonds. on their left the  shadows of shasta and hwin and bree and aravis, enormously long, raced beside them.  the double peak of mount pire, far ahead, flashed in the sunlight and shasta saw they  were a little out of the course. "a bit left, a bit left," he sang out. best of all, when  you looked back, tashbaan was already small and remote. the tombs were quite invisible:  swallowed up in that single, jagged-edged hump which was the city of the tisroc.  everyone felt better.
but not for long. though tashbaan looked very far away when they first saw  it, it refused to look any further away as they went on. shasta gave up looking back at  it, for it only gave him the feeling that they were not moving at all. then the light  became a nuisance.
the glare of the sand made his eyes ache: but he knew he mustnt shut them.  he must screw them up and keep on looking ahead at mount pire and shouting out  directions.
then came the heat. he noticed it for the first time when he had to  dismount and walk: as he slipped down to the sand the heat from it struck up into his face as if  from the opening of an oven door. next time it was worse. but the third time, as his bare  feet touched the sand he screamed with pain and got one foot back in the stirrup and the  other half over brees back before you could have said knife.
"sorry, bree," he gasped. "i cant walk. it burns my feet." "of course!"  panted bree.
"should have thought of that myself. stay on. cant be helped.”
"its all right for you," said shasta to aravis who was walking beside  hwin. "youve got shoes on.”
aravis said nothing and looked prim. lets hope she didnt mean to, but she  did.
on again, trot and walk and trot, jingle-jingle-jingle, squeak-squeak- squeak, smell of hot horse, smell of hot self, blinding glare, headache. and nothing at all  different for mile after mile. tashbaan would never look any further away. the mountains would  never look any nearer. you felt this had been going on for always - jingle- jingle-jingle, squeaksqueak-squeak, smell of hot horse, smell of hot self.
of course one tried all sorts of games with oneself to try to make the time  pass: and of course they were all no good. and one tried very hard not to think of  drinks-iced sherbet in a palace in tashbaan, clear spring water tinkling with a dark earthy  sound, cold, smooth milk just creamy enough and not too creamy - and the harder you  tried not to think, the more you thought.
at last there was something different - a mass of rock sticking up out of  the sand about fifty yards long and thirty feet high. it did not cast much shadow, for the  sun was now very high, but it cast a little. into that shade they crowded. there they  ate some food and drank a little water. it is not easy giving a horse a drink out of a skin  bottle, but bree and hwin were clever with their lips. no one had anything like enough. no one  spoke. the horses were flecked with foam and their breathing was noisy. the children  were pale.
after a very short rest they went on again. same noises, same smells, same  glare, till at last their shadows began to fall on their right, and then got longer and  longer till they seemed to stretch out to the eastern end of the world. very slowly the sun  drew nearer to the western horizon. and now at last he was down and, thank goodness, the  merciless glare was gone, though the heat coming up from the sand was still as bad as  ever. four pairs of eyes were looking out eagerly for any sign of the valley that  sallowpad the raven had spoken about. but, mile after mile, there was nothing but level  sand. and now the day was quite definitely done, and most of the stars were out, and  still the horses thundered on and the children rose and sank in their saddles, miserable  with thirst and weariness. not till the moon had risen did shasta - in the strange, barking  voice of someone whose mouth is perfectly dry-shout out:  "there it is!”
there was no mistaking it now. ahead, and a little to their right, there  was at last a slope: a slope downward and hummocks of rock on each side. the horses were far too  tired to speak but they swung round towards it and in a minute or two they were  entering the gully. at first it was worse in there than it had been out in the open  desert, for there was a breathless stuffiness between the rocky walls and less moonlight. the slope  continued  
steeply downwards and the rocks on either hand rose to the height of  cliffs. then they began to meet vegetation - prickly cactus-like plants and coarse grass of  the kind that would prick your fingers. soon the horse-hoofs were falling on pebbles and  stones instead of sand. round every bend of the valley - and it had many bends -  they looked eagerly for water. the horses were nearly at the end of their strength now,  and hwin, stumbling and panting; was lagging behind bree. they were almost in despair  before at last they came to a little muddiness and a tiny trickle of water through  softer and better grass. and the trickle became a brook, and the brook became a stream with  bushes on each side, and the stream became a river and there came (after more  disappointments than i could possibly describe) -a moment when shasta, who had been in a kind of  doze, suddenly realized that bree had stopped and found himself slipping off.  before them a little cataract of water poured into a broad pool: and both the horses were  already in the pool with their heads down, drinking, drinking, drinking. "o-o-oh," said  shasta and plunged in - it was about up to his knees - and stooped his head right into  the cataract. it was perhaps the loveliest moment in his life.
it was about ten minutes later when all four of them (the two children wet  nearly all over)
came out and began to notice their surroundings. the moon was now high  enough to peep down into the valley. there was soft grass on both sides of the river, and  beyond the grass, trees and bushes sloped up to the bases of the cliffs. there must  have been some wonderful flowering shrubs hidden in that shadowy undergrowth for the whole  glade was full of the coolest and most delicious smells. and out of the darkest  recess among the trees there came a sound shasta had never heard beforea nightingale.
everyone was much too tired to speak or to eat. the horses, without waiting  to be unsaddled, lay down at once. so did aravis and shasta.
about ten minutes later the careful hwin said, "but we mustnt go to sleep.  weve got to keep ahead of that rabadash.”
"no," said bree very slowly. "mustnt go sleep. just a little rest.”
shasta knew (for a moment) that they would all go to sleep if he didnt get  up and do something about it, and felt that he ought to. in fact he decided that he  would get up and persuade them to go on. but presently; not yet: not just yet...
very soon the moon shone and the nightingale sang over two horses and two  human children, all fast asleep.
it was aravis who awoke first. the sun was already high in the heavens and  the cool morning hours were already wasted. "its my fault," she said to herself  furiously as she jumped up and began rousing the others. "one wouldnt expect horses to keep  awake after a days work like that, even if they can talk. and of course that boy  wouldnt; hes had no decent training. but i ought to have known better.”
the others were dazed and stupid with the heaviness of their sleep.
"neigh-ho - broo-hoo," said bree. "been sleeping in my saddle, eh? ill  never do that again. most uncomfortable-”
"oh come on, come on," said aravis. "weve lost half the morning already.  there isnt a moment to spare.”
"a fellows got to have a mouthful of grass," said bree.
im afraid we cant wait," said aravis.
"whats the terrible hurry?" said bree. "weve crossed the desert, havent  we?”
"but were not in archenland yet," said aravis. "and weve got to get there  before rabadash.”
"oh, we must be miles ahead of him," said bree. "havent we been coming a  shorter way? didnt that raven friend of yours say this was a short cut, shasta?”
"he didnt say anything about shorter," answered shasta. "he only said  better, because you got to a river this way. if the oasis is due north of tashbaan, then  im afraid this may be longer.”
"well i cant go on without a snack," said bree. "take my bridle off,  shasta.”
"p-please," said hwin, very shyly, "i feel just like bree that i cant go  on. but when horses have humans (with spurs and things) on their backs, arent they  often made to go on when theyre feeling like this? and then they find they can. i m-mean -  oughtnt we to be able to do even more, now that were free. its all for narnia.”
"i think, maam," said bree very crushingly, "that i know a little more  about campaigns and forced marches and what a horse can stand than you do.”
to this hwin made no answer, being, like most highly bred mares, a very  nervous and gentle person who was easily put down. in reality she was quite right, and  if bree had had a tarkaan on his back at that moment to make him go on, he would have found  that he was good for several hours hard going. but one of the worst results of  being a slave and being forced to do things is that when there is no one to force you any  more you find you have almost lost the power of forcing yourself.
so they had to wait while bree had a snack and a drink, and of course hwin  and the children had a snack and a drink too. it must have been nearly eleven  oclock in the morning before they finally got going again. and even then bree took things  much more gently than yesterday. it was really hwin, though she was the weaker and  more tired of the two, who set the pace.
the valley itself, with its brown, cool river, and grass and moss and wild  flowers and rhododendrons, was such a pleasant place that it made you want to ride  slowly.

 www.xiabook.com



CHAPTER TEN

　小./说。txt天堂
the hermit of the southern march  after they had ridden for several hours down the valley, it widened out and  they could see what was ahead of them. the river which they had been following here  joined a broader river, wide and turbulent, which flowed from their left to their  right, towards the east. beyond this new river a delightful country rose gently in low hills,  ridge beyond ridge, to the northern mountains themselves. to the right there were rocky  pinnacles, one or two of them with snow clinging to the ledges. to the left, pine-clad  slopes, frowning cliffs, narrow gorges, and blue peaks stretched away as far as the  eye could reach. he could no longer make out mount pire. straight ahead the mountain  range sank to a wooded saddle which of course must be the pass from archenland into  narnia.
"broo-hoo-hoo, the north, the green north!" neighed bree: and certainly the  lower hills looked greener and fresher than anything that aravis and shasta, with their  southern-bred eyes, had ever imagined. spirits rose as they clattered down to the  waters-meet of the two rivers.
the eastern-flowing river, which was pouring from the higher mountains at  the western end of the range, was far too swift and too broken with rapids for them to  think of swimming it; but after some casting about, up and down the bank, they found  a place shallow enough to wade. the roar and clatter of water, the great swirl  against the horses fetlocks, the cool, stirring air and the darting dragon-flies, filled  shasta with a strange excitement.
"friends, we are in archenland!" said bree proudly as he splashed and  churned his way out on the northern bank. "i think that river weve just crossed is called  the winding arrow.”
"i hope were in time," murmured hwin.
then they began going up, slowly and zigzagging a good deal, for the hills  were steep. it was all open park-like country with no roads or houses in sight. scattered  trees, never thick enough to be a forest, were everywhere. shasta, who had lived all his  life in an almost tree-less grassland, had never seen so many or so many kinds. if you  had been there you would probably have known (he didnt) that he was seeing oaks,  beeches, silver birches, rowans, and sweet chestnuts. rabbits scurried away in every  direction as they advanced, and presently they saw a whole herd of fallow deer making off  among the trees.
"isnt it simply glorious!" said aravis.
at the first ridge shasta turned in the saddle and looked back. there was  no sign of tashbaan; the desert, unbroken except by the narrow green crack which they  had travelled down, spread to the horizon.
"hullo!" he said suddenly. "whats that!”
"whats what?" said bree, turning round. hwin and aravis did the same.
"that," said shasta, pointing. "it looks like smoke. is it a fire?”
"sand-storm, i should say," said bree.
"not much wind to raise it," said aravis.
"oh!" exclaimed hwin. "look! there are things flashing in it. look! theyre  helmets - and armour. and its moving: moving this way.”
"by tash!" said aravis. "its the army. its rabadash.”
"oh course it is," said hwin. "just what i was afraid of. quick! we must  get to anvard before it." and without another word she whisked round and began galloping  north. bree tossed his head and did the same.
"come on, bree, come on," yelled aravis over her shoulder.
the race was very gruelling for the horses. as they topped each ridge they  found another valley and another ridge beyond it; and though they knew they were going in  more or less the right direction, no one knew how far it was to anvard. from the top of  the second ridge shasta looked back again. instead of a dust-cloud well out in the  desert he now saw a black, moving mass, rather like ants, on the far bank of the winding  arrow. they were doubtless looking for a ford.
"theyre on the river!" he yelled wildly.
"quick! quick!" shouted aravis. "we might as well not have come at all if  we dont reach anvard in time. gallop, bree, gallop. remember youre a war-horse.”
it was all shasta could do to prevent himself from shouting out similar  instructions; but he thought, "the poor chaps doing all he can already," and held his  tongue. and certainly both horses were doing, if not all they could, all they thought they could;  which is not quite the same thing. bree had caught up with hwin and they thundered side  by side over the turf. it didnt look as if hwin could possibly keep it up much longer.
at that moment everyones feelings were completely altered by a sound from  behind. it was not the sound they had been expecting to hear - the noise of hoofs and  jingling armour, mixed, perhaps, with calormene battle-cries. yet shasta knew it at  once. it was the same snarling roar he had heard that moonlit night when they first met  aravis and hwin. bree knew it too. his eyes gleamed red and his ears lay flat back on  his skull. and bree now discovered that he had not really been going as fast - not quite  as fast - as he could. shasta felt the change at once. now they were really going all out.  in a few seconds they were well ahead of hwin.
"its not fair," thought shasta. "i did think wed be safe from lions  here!”
he looked over his shoulder. everything was only too clear. a huge tawny  creature, its body low to the ground, like a cat streaking across the lawn to a tree when  a strange dog has got into the garden, was behind them. and it was nearer every second  and half second.
he looked forward again and saw something which he did not take in, or even  think about. their way was barred by a smooth green wall about ten feet high. in  the middle of that wall there was a gate, open. in the middle of the gateway stood a tall  man dressed, down to his bare feet, in a robe coloured like autumn leaves, leaning on a  straight staff.
his beard fell almost to his knees.
shasta saw all this in a glance and looked back again. the lion had almost  got hwin now.
it was making snaps at her hind legs, and there was no hope now in her  foamflecked, wide-eyed face.
"stop," bellowed shasta in brees ear. "must go back. must help!”
bree always said afterwards that he never heard, or never understood this;  and as he was in general a very truthful horse we must accept his word.
shasta slipped his feet out of the stirrups, slid both his legs over the  left side, hesitated for one hideous hundredth of a second, and jumped. it hurt horribly and nearly  winded him; but before he knew how it hurt him he was staggering back to help aravis.  he had never done anything like this in his life before and hardly knew why he was doing  it now.
one of the most terrible noises in the world, a horses scream, broke from  hwins lips.
aravis was stooping low over hwins neck and seemed to be trying to draw  her sword.
and now all three - aravis, hwin, and the lion were almost on top of  shasta. before they reached him the lion rose on its hind legs, larger than you would have  believed a lion could be, and jabbed at aravis with its right paw. shasta could see all the  terrible claws extended. aravis screamed and reeled in the saddle. the lion was tearing  her shoulders.
shasta, half mad with horror, managed to lurch towards the brute. he had no  weapon, not even a stick or a stone. he shouted out, idiotically, at the lion as one  would at a dog. "go home! go home!" for a fraction of a second he was staring right into its  wideopened,  
raging mouth. then, to his utter astonishment, the lion, still on its hind  legs, checked itself suddenly, turned head over heels, picked itself up, and rushed away.
shasta did not for a moment suppose it had gone for good. he turned and  raced for the gate in the green wall which, now for the first time, he remembered seeing.  hwin, stumbling and nearly fainting, was just entering the gate: aravis still  kept her seat but her back was covered with blood.
"come in, my daughter, come in," the robed and bearded man was saying, and  then "come in, my son" as shasta panted up to him. he heard the gate closed  behind him; and the bearded stranger was already helping aravis off her horse.
they were in a wide and perfectly circular enclosure, protected by a high  wall of green turf. a pool of perfectly still water, so full that the water was almost  exactly level with the ground, lay before him. at one end of the pool, completely  overshadowing it with its branches, there grew the hugest and most beautiful tree that shasta had  ever seen. beyond the pool was a little low house of stone roofed with deep and ancient  thatch. there was a sound of bleating and over at the far side of the enclosure there were some  goats. the level ground was completely covered with the finest grass.
"are - are - are you," panted shasta. "are you king lune of archenland?”
the old man shook his head. "no," he replied in a quiet voice, "i am the  hermit of the southern march. and now, my son, waste no time on questions, but obey. this  damsel is wounded. your horses are spent. rabadash is at this moment finding a ford  over the winding arrow. if you run now, without a moments rest, you will still be  in time to warn king lune.”
shastas heart fainted at these words for he felt he had no strength left.  and he writhed inside at what seemed the cruelty and unfairness of the demand. he had not  yet learned that if you do one good deed your reward usually is to be set to do another  and harder and better one. but all he said out loud was:  "where is the king?”
the hermit turned and pointed with his staff. "look," he said. "there is  another gate, right opposite to the one you entered by. open it and go straight ahead:  always straight ahead, over level or steep, over smooth or rough, over dry or wet. i know  by my art that you will find king lune straight ahead. but run, run: always run.”
shasta nodded his head, ran to the northern gate and disappeared beyond it.  then the hermit took aravis, whom he had all this time been supporting with his left  arm, and half led, half carried her into the house. after a long time he came out again.
"now, cousins," he said to the horses. "it is your turn.”
without waiting for an answer - and indeed they were too exhausted to speak  - he took the bridles and saddles off both of them. then he rubbed them both down, so  well that a groom in a kings stable could not have done it better.
"there, cousins," he said, "dismiss it all from your minds and be  comforted. here is water and there is grass. you shall have a hot mash when i have milked my other  cousins, the goats.”
"sir," said hwin, finding her voice at last, "will the tarkheena live? has  the lion killed her?”
"i who know many present things by my art," replied the hermit with a  smile, "have yet little knowledge of things future. therefore i do not know whether any man  or woman or beast in the whole world will be alive when the sun sets tonight. but be of  good hope.
the damsel is likely to live as long as any of her age.”
when aravis came to herself she found that she was lying on her face on a  low bed of extraordinary softness in a cool, bare room with walls of undressed stone.  she couldnt understand why she had been laid on her face; but when she tried to turn  and felt the hot, burning pains all over her back, she remembered, and realized why. she  couldnt understand what delightfully springy stuff the bed was made of, because it  was made of heather (which is the best bedding) and heather was a thing she had never  seen or heard of.
the door opened and the hermit entered, carrying a large wooden bowl in his  hand. after carefully setting this down, he came to the bedside, and asked:  "how do you find yourself, my daughter?”
"my back is very sore, father," said aravis, "but there is nothing else  wrong with me.”
he knelt beside her, laid his hand on her forehead, and felt her pulse.
"there is no fever," he said. "you will do well. indeed there is no reason  why you should not get up tomorrow. but now, drink this.”
he fetched the wooden bowl and held it to her lips. aravis couldnt help  making a face when she tasted it, for goats milk is rather a shock when you are not used  to it. but she was very thirsty and managed to drink it all and felt better when she had  finished.
"now, my daughter, you may sleep when you wish," said the hermit. "for your  wounds are washed and dressed and though they smart they are no more serious than  if they had been the cuts of a whip. it must have been a very strange lion; for  instead-of catching you out of the saddle and getting his teeth into you, he has only drawn his  claws across your back. ten scratches: sore, but not deep or dangerous.”
"i say!" said aravis. "i have had luck.”
"daughter," said the hermit, "i have now lived a hundred and nine winters  in this world and have never yet met any such thing as luck. them is something about all  this that i do not understand: but if ever we need to know it, you may be sure that we  shall.”
"and what about rabadash and his two hundred horse?" asked aravis.
"they will not pass this way, i think," said the hermit. "they must have  found a ford by now well to the east of us. from there they will try to ride straight to  anvard.”
"poor shasta!" said aravis. "has he far to go? will he get there first?”
"there is good hope of it," said the old man.
aravis lay down again (on her side this time) and said, "have i been asleep  for a long time? it seems to be getting dark.”
the hermit was looking out of the only window, which faced north. "this is  not the darkness of night," he said presently. "the clouds are falling down from  stormness head.
our foul weather always comes from there in these parts. there will be  thick fog tonight.”
next day, except for her sore back, aravis felt so well that after  breakfast (which was porridge and cream) the hermit said she could get up. and of course she at  once went out to speak to the horses. the weather had changed and the whole of that green  enclosure was filled, like a great green cup, with sunlight. it was a very peaceful  place, lonely and quiet.
hwin at once trotted across to aravis and gave her a horse-kiss.
"but wheres bree?" said aravis when each had asked after the others  health and sleep.
"over there," said hwin, pointing with her nose to the far side of the  circle. "and i wish youd come and talk to him. theres something wrong, i cant get a word out  of him.”
they strolled across and found bree lying with his face towards the wall,  and though he must have heard them coming, he never turned his head or spoke a word.
"good morning, bree," said aravis. "how are you this morning?”
bree muttered something that no one could hear.
"the hermit says that shasta probably got to king lune in time," continued  aravis, "so it looks as if all our troubles are over. narnia, at last, bree!”
"i shall never see narnia," said bree in a low voice.
"arent you well, bree dear?" said aravis.
bree turned round at last, his face mournful as only a horses can be.
"i shall go back to calormen," he said.
"what?" said aravis. "back to slavery!”
"yes," said bree. "slavery is all im fit for. how can i ever show my face  among the free horses of narnia? - i who left a mare and a girl and a boy to be eaten by  lions while i galloped all i could to save my own wretched skin!”
"we all ran as hard as we could," said hwin.
"shasta didnt!" snorted bree. "at least he ran in the right direction: ran  back. and that is what shames me most of all. i, who called myself a war-horse and boasted of  a hundred fights, to be beaten by a little human boy - a child, a mere foal, who had  never held a sword nor had any good nurture or example in his life!”
"i know," said aravis. "i felt just the same. shasta was marvellous. im  just as bad as you, bree. ive been snubbing him and looking down on him ever since you met us  and now he turns out to be the best of us all. but i think it would be better to  stay and say were sorry than to go back to calormen.”
"its all very well for you," said bree. "you havent disgraced yourself.  but ive lost everything.”
"my good horse," said the hermit, who had approached them unnoticed because  his bare feet made so little noise on that sweet, dewy grass. "my good horse, youve  lost nothing but your self-conceit. no, no, cousin. dont put back your ears and shake  your mane at me. if you are really so humbled as you sounded a minute ago, you must  learn to listen to sense. youre not quite the great horse you had come to think, from living  among poor dumb horses. of course you were braver and cleverer than them. you could  hardly help being that. it doesnt follow that youll be anyone very special in narnia.  but as long as you know youre nobody special, youll be a very decent sort of horse, on  the whole, and taking one thing with another. and now, if you and my other four-footed  cousin will come round to the kitchen door well see about the other half of that  mash.”





CHAPTER ELEVEN

wwＷ．xiabook.com
the unwelcome fellow traveller  
when shasta went through the gate he found a slope of grass and a little  heather running up before him to some trees. he had nothing to think about now and  no plans to make: he had only to run, and that was quite enough. his limbs were  shaking, a terrible stitch was beginning in his side, and the sweat that kept dropping into his  eyes blinded them and made them smart. he was unsteady on his feet too, and more than  once he nearly turned his ankle on a loose stone.
the trees were thicker now than they had yet been and in the more open  spaces there was bracken. the sun had gone in without making it any cooler. it had become  one of those hot, grey days when there seem to be twice as many flies as usual. shastas  face was covered with them; he didnt even try to shake them off - he had too much  else to do.
suddenly he heard a horn - not a great throbbing horn like the horns of  tashbaan but a merry call, ti-ro-to-to-ho! next moment he came out into a wide glade and  found himself in a crowd of people.
at least, it looked a crowd to him. in reality there were about fifteen or  twenty of them, all gentlemen in green huntingdress, with their horses; some in the saddle  and some standing by their horses heads. in the centre someone was holding the  stirrup for a man to mount. and the man he was holding it for was the jolliest, fat,  applecheeked, twinkling eyed king you could imagine.
as soon as shasta came in sight this king forgot all about mounting his  horse. he spread out his arms to shasta, his face lit up, and he cried out in a great, deep  voice that seemed to come from the bottom of his chest:  "corin! my son! and on foot, and in rags! what-”
"no," panted shasta, shaking his head. "not prince corin. i - i - know im  like him... saw his highness in tashbaan... sent his greetings.”
the king was staring at shasta with an extraordinary expression on his  face.
"are you k-king lune?" gasped shasta. and then, without waiting for an  answer, "lord king - fly - anvard shut the gates - enemies upon you - rabadash and two  hundred horse.”
"have you assurance of this, boy?" asked one of the other gentlemen.
"my own eyes," said shasta. "ive seen them. raced them all the way from  tashbaan.”
"on foot?" said the gentleman, raising his eyebrows a little.
horses-with the hermit," said shasta.
"question him no more; darrin," said king lune. "i see truth in his face.  we must ride for it, gentlemen. a spare horse there, for the boy. you can ride fast,  friend?”
for answer shasta put his foot in the stirrup of the horse which had been  led towards him and a moment later he was in the saddle. he had done it a hundred times  with bree in the last few weeks, and his mounting was very different now from what it had  been on that first night when bree had said that he climbed up a horse as if he were  climbing a haystack.
he was pleased to hear the lord darrin say to the king, "the boy has a true  horsemans seat, sire. ill warrant theres noble blood in him.”
"his blood, aye, theres the point," said the king. and he stared hard at  shasta again with that curious expression, almost a hungry expression, in his steady, grey  eyes.
but by now -the whole party was moving off at a brisk canter. shastas seat  was excellent but he was sadly puzzled what to do with his reins, for he had never  touched the reins while he was on brees back. but he looked very carefully out of the  corners of his eyes to see what the others were doing (as some of us have done at parties when  we werent quite sure which knife or fork we were meant to use) and tried to get his  fingers right. but he didnt dare to try really directing the horse; he trusted it would  follow the rest. the horse was of course an ordinary horse, not a talking horse; but it had  quite wits enough to realize that the strange boy on its back had no whip and no spurs and  was not really master of the situation. that was why shasta soon found himself at the tail  end of the procession.
even so, he was going pretty fast. there were no flies now and the air in  his face was delicious. he had got his breath back too. and his errand had succeeded.  for the first time since the arrival at tashbaan (how long ago it seemed!) he was  beginning to enjoy himself.
he looked up to see how much nearer the mountain tops had come. to his disappointment he could not see them at all: only a vague greyness, rolling  down towards them. he had never been in mountain country before and was surprised. "its  a cloud," he said to himself, "a cloud coming down. i see. up here in the hills one is  really in the sky.
i shall see what the inside of a cloud is like. what fun! ive often  wondered." far away on his left and a little behind him, the sun was getting ready to set.
they had come to a rough kind of road by now and were making very good  speed. but shastas horse was still the last of the lot. once or twice when the road  made a bend (there was now continuous forest on each side of it) he lost sight of the  others for a second or two.
then they plunged into the fog, or else the fog rolled over them. the world  became grey.
shasta had not realized how cold and wet the inside of a cloud would be;  nor how dark.
the grey turned to black with alarming speed.
someone at the head of the column winded the horn every now and then, and  each time the sound came from a little farther off. he couldnt see any of the others  now, but of course hed be able to as soon as he got round the next bend. but when he  rounded it he still couldnt see them. in fact he could see nothing at all. his horse was  walking now.
"get on, horse, get on," said shasta. then came the horn, very faint. bree  had always told him that he must keep his heels well turned out, and shasta had got  the idea that something very terrible would happen if he dug his heels into a horses  sides. this seemed to him an occasion for trying it. "look here, horse," he said, "if  you dont buck up, do you know what ill do? ill dig my heels into you. i really will."  the horse, however, took no notice of this threat. so shasta settled himself firmly in  the saddle, gripped with his knees, clenched his teeth, and punched both the horses  sides with his heels as hard as he could.
the only result was that the horse broke into a kind of pretence of a trot  for five or six paces and then subsided into a walk again. and now it was quite dark and  they seemed to have given up blowing that horn. the only sound was a steady drip-drip from  the branches of the trees.
"well, i suppose even a walk will get us somewhere sometime," said shasta  to himself. "i only hope i shant run into rabadash and his people.”
he went on for what seemed a long time, always at a walking pace. he began  to hate that horse, and he was also beginning to feel very hungry.
presently he came to a place where the road divided into two. he was just  wondering which led to anvard when he was startled by a noise from behind him. it was  the noise of trotting horses. "rabadash!" thought shasta. he had no way of guessing  which road rabadash would take. "but if i take one," said shasta to himself, "he may  take the other: and if i stay at the cross-roads im sure to be caught." he dismounted and  led his horse as quickly as he could along the right-hand road.
the sound of the cavalry grew rapidly nearer and in a minute or two shasta  realized that they were at the crossroads. he held his breath, waiting to see which way  they would take.
there came a low word of command "halt!" then a moment of horsey noises -  nostrils blowing, hoofs pawing, bits being champed, necks being patted. then a voice  spoke.
"attend, all of you," it said. "we are now within a furlong of the castle.  remember your orders. once we are in narnia, as we should be by sunrise, you are to kill  as little as possible. on this venture you are to regard every drop of narnian blood as  more precious than a gallon of your own. on this venture, i say. the gods will send us a  happier hour and then you must leave nothing alive between cair paravel and the western  waste. but we are not yet in narnia. here in archenland it is another thing. in the  assault on this castle of king lunes, nothing matters but speed. show your mettle. it must  be mine  
within an hour. and if it is, i give it all to you. i reserve no booty for  myself. kill me every barbarian male within its walls, down to the child that was born  yesterday, and everything else is yours to divide as you please - the women, the gold, the  jewels, the weapons, and the wine. the man that i see hanging back when we come to the  gates shall be burned alive. in the name of tash the irresistible, the inexorable  forward!”
with a great cloppitty-clop the column began to move, and shasta breathed  again. they had taken the other road.
shasta thought they took a long time going past, for though he had been  talking and thinking about "two hundred horse" all day, he had not realized how many  they really were. but at last the sound died away and once more he was alone amid the  drip-drip from the trees.
he now knew the way to anvard but of course he could not now go there: that  would only mean running into the arms of rabadashs troopers. "what on earth am i  to do?" said shasta to himself. but he remounted his horse and continued along the road  he had chosen, in the faint hope of finding some cottage where he might ask for  shelter and a meal. he had thought, of course, of going back to aravis and bree and hwin  at the hermitage, but he couldnt because by now he had not the least idea of the  direction.
"after all," said shasta, "this road is bound to get to somewhere.”
but that all depends on what you mean by somewhere. the road kept on  getting to somewhere in the sense that it got to more and more trees, all dark and  dripping, and to colder and colder air. and strange, icy winds kept blowing the mist past  him though they never blew it away. if he had been used to mountain country he would have  realized that this meant he was now very high up - perhaps right at the top of the pass.  but shasta knew nothing about mountains.
"i do think," said shasta, "that i must be the most unfortunate boy that  ever lived in the whole world. everything goes right for everyone except me. those narnian  lords and ladies got safe away from tashbaan; i was left behind. aravis and bree and  hwin are all as snug as anything with that old hermit: of course i was the one who was  sent on. king lune and his people must have got safely into the castle and shut the gates  long before rabadash arrived, but i get left out.”
and being very tired and having nothing inside him, he felt so sorry for  himself that the tears rolled down his cheeks.
what put a stop to all this was a sudden fright. shasta discovered that  someone or somebody was walking beside him. it was pitch dark and he could see  nothing. and the thing (or person) was going so quietly that he could hardly hear any  footfalls. what he could hear was breathing. his invisible companion seemed to breathe on a  very large scale, and shasta got the impression that it was a very large creature. and  he had come to  
notice this breathing so gradually that he had really no idea how long it  had been there. it was a horrible shock.
it darted into his mind that he had heard long ago that there were giants  in these northern countries. he bit his lip in terror. but now that he really had something  to cry about, he stopped crying.
the thing (unless it was a person) went on beside him so very quietly that  shasta began to hope he had only imagined it. but just as he was becoming quite sure of  it, there suddenly came a deep, rich sigh out of the darkness beside him. that  couldnt be imagination! anyway, he had felt the hot breath of that sigh on his chilly  left hand.
if the horse had been any good - or if he had known how to get any good out  of the horse - he would have risked everything on a breakaway and a wild gallop. but he  knew he couldnt make that horse gallop. so he went on at a walking pace and the  unseen companion walked and breathed beside him. at last he could bear it no  longer.
"who are you?" he said, scarcely above a whisper.
"one who has waited long for you to speak," said the thing. its voice was  not loud, but very large and deep.
"are you- are you a giant?" asked shasta.
"you might call me a giant," said the large voice. "but i am not like the  creatures you call giants.”
"i cant see you at all," said shasta, after staring very hard. then (for  an even more terrible idea had come into his head) he said, almost in a scream, "youre  not - not something dead, are you? oh please - please do go away. what harm have i  ever done you? oh, i am the unluckiest person in the whole world!”
once more he felt the warm breath of the thing on his hand and face.  "there," it said, "that is not the breath of a ghost. tell me your sorrows.”
shasta was a little reassured by the breath: so he told how he had never  known his real father or mother and had been brought up sternly by the fisherman. and then  he told the story of his escape and how they were chased by lions and forced to swim  for their lives; and of all their dangers in tashbaan and about his night among the tombs  and how the beasts howled at him out of the desert. and he told about the heat and  thirst of their desert journey and how they were almost at their goal when another lion  chased them and wounded aravis. and also, how very long it was since he had had anything to  eat.
"i do not call you unfortunate," said the large voice.
"dont you think it was bad luck to meet so many lions?" said shasta.
"there was only one lion," said the voice.
"what on earth do you mean? ive just told you there were at least two the  first night, and-”
"there was only one: but he was swift of foot.”
"how do you know?”
"i was the lion." and as shasta gaped with open mouth and said nothing, the  voice continued. "i was the lion who forced you to join with aravis. i was the  cat who comforted you among the houses of the dead. i was the lion who drove the  jackals from you while you slept. i was the lion who gave the horses the new strength of  fear for the last mile so that you should reach king lune in time. and i was the lion  you do not remember who pushed the boat in which you lay, a child near death, so that  it came to shore where a man sat, wakeful at midnight, to receive you.”
"then it was you who wounded aravis?”
"it was i”
"but what for?”
"child," said the voice, "i am telling you your story, not hers. i tell no  one any story but his own.”
"who are you?" asked shasta.
"myself," said the voice, very deep and low so that the earth shook: and  again "myself", loud and clear and gay: and then the third time "myself", whispered so  softly you could hardly hear it, and yet it seemed to come from all round you as if the  leaves rustled with it.
shasta was no longer afraid that the voice belonged to something that would  eat him, nor that it was the voice of a ghost. but a new and different sort of trembling  came over him.
yet he felt glad too.
the mist was turning from black to grey and from grey to white. this must  have begun to happen some time ago, but while he had been talking to the thing he had not  been noticing anything else. now, the whiteness around him became a shining  whiteness; his eyes began to blink. somewhere ahead he could hear birds singing. he knew  the night was over at last. he could see the mane and ears and head of his horse  quite easily now.
a golden light fell on them from the left. he thought it was the sun.
he turned and saw, pacing beside him, taller than the horse, a lion. the  horse did not seem to be afraid of it or else could not see it. it was from the lion that  the light came.
no one ever saw anything more terrible or beautiful.
luckily shasta had lived all his life too far south in calormen to have  heard the tales that were whispered in tashbaan about a dreadful narnian demon that appeared in  the form of a lion. and of course he knew none of the true stories about aslan, the  great lion, the son of the emperor-over-the-sea, the king above all high kings in narnia. but  after one glance at the lions face he slipped out of the saddle and fell at its  feet. he couldnt say anything but then he didnt want to say anything, and he knew he neednt  say anything.
the high king above all kings stooped towards him. its mane, and some  strange and solemn perfume that hung about the mane, was all round him. it touched his  forehead with its tongue. he lifted his face and their eyes met. then instantly the  pale brightness of the mist and the fiery brightness of the lion rolled themselves together  into a swirling glory and gathered themselves up and disappeared. he was alone with the  horse on a grassy hillside under a blue sky. and there were birds singing.

www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ



CHAPTER TWELVE

大;学，生，小，说'网
shasta in narnia  "was it all a dream?" wondered shasta. but it couldnt have been a dream  for there in the grass before him he saw the deep, large print of the lions front right  paw. it took ones breath away to think of the weight that could make a footprint like  that. but there was something more remarkable than the size about it. as he looked at it,  water had already filled the bottom of it. soon it was full to the brim, and then  overflowing, and a little stream was running downhill, past him, over the grass.
shasta stooped and drank - a very long drink - and then dipped his face in  and splashed his head. it was extremely cold, and clear as glass, and refreshed him very  much. after that he stood up, shaking the water out of his ears and flinging the wet  hair back from his forehead, and began to take stock of his surroundings.
apparently it was still very early morning. the sun had only just risen,  and it had risen out of the forests which he saw low down and far away on his right. the  country j which he was looking at was absolutely new to him. it was t a green valley-land  dotted with trees through which he caught the gleam of a river that wound away roughly  to the north-west. on the far side of the valley there were high and even rocky hills,  but they were lower than the mountains he had seen yesterday. then he began to guess  where he was.
he turned and looked behind him and saw that the slope on which he was  standing belonged to a range of far higher mountains.
"i see," said shasta to himself. "those are the big mountains between  archenland and narnia. i was on the°. other side of them yesterday. i must have come  through the pass in the night. what luck that i hit it! - at least it wasnt luck at all  really, it was him. and now im in narnia.”
he turned and unsaddled his horse and took off its bridle - "though you are  a perfectly horrid horse," he said. it took no notice of this remark and immediately  began eating grass. that horse had a very low opinion of shasta.
"i wish i could eat grass!" thought shasta. "its no good going back to  anvard, itll all be besieged. id better get lower down into the valley and see if i can get  anything to eat.”
so he went on downhill (the thick dew was cruelly cold to his bare feet)  till he came into a wood. there was a kind of track running through it and he had not  followed this for many minutes when he heard a thick and rather wheezy voice saying to him.
"good morning, neighbour.”
shasta looked round eagerly to find the speaker and presently saw a small,  prickly person with a dark face who had just come out from among the trees. at least, it  was small for a person but very big indeed for a hedgehog, which was what it was.
"good morning," said shasta. "but im not a neighbour. in fact im a  stranger in these parts.”
"ah?" said the hedgehog inquiringly.
"ive come over the mountains - from archenland, you know.”
"ha, archenland," said the hedgehog. "thats a terrible long way. never  been there myself.”
"and i think, perhaps," said shasta, "someone ought to be told that theres  an army of savage calormenes attacking anvard at this very moment.”
"you dont say so!" answered the hedgehog. "well, think of that. and they  do say that calormen is hundreds and thousands of miles away, right at the worlds end,  across a great sea of sand.”
"its not nearly as far as you think," said shasta. "and oughtnt something  to be done about this attack on anvard? oughtnt your high king to be told?”
"certain sure, something ought to be done about it," said the hedgehog.  "but you see im just on my way to bed for a good days sleep. hullo, neighbour!”
the last words were addressed to an immense biscuitcoloured rabbit whose  head had just popped up from somewhere beside the path. the hedgehog immediately told the  rabbit what it had just learned from shasta. the rabbit agreed that this was very  remarkable news and that somebody ought to tell someone about it with a view to doing  something.
and so it went on. every few minutes they were joined by other creatures,  some from the branches overhead and some from little underground houses at their feet,  till the party consisted of five rabbits, a squirrel, two magpies, a goat-foot faun, and a  mouse, who all talked at the same time and all agreed with the hedgehog. for the truth was  that in that golden age when the witch and the winter had gone and peter the high king  ruled at cair paravel, the smaller woodland people of narnia were so safe and happy  that they were getting a little careless.
presently, however, two more practical people arrived in the little wood.  one was a red dwarf whose name appeared to be duffle. the other was a stag, a beautiful  lordly creature with wide liquid eyes, dappled flanks and legs so thin and  graceful that they looked as if you could break them with two fingers.
"lion alive!" roared the dwarf as soon as he had heard the news. "and if  thats so, why are we all standing still, chattering? enemies at anvard! news must be sent  to cair paravel at once. the army must be called out. narnia must go to the aid of  king lune.”
"ah!" said the hedgehog. "but you wont find the high king at the cair.  hes away to the north trouncing those giants. and talking of giants, neighbours, that puts  me in mind -”
"wholl take our message?" interrupted the dwarf. "anyone here got more  speed than me?”
"ive got speed," said the stag. "whats my message? how many calormenes?”
"two hundred: under prince rabadash. and -" but the stag was already away -  all four legs off the ground at once, and in a moment its white stern had  disappeared among the remoter trees.
"wonder where hes going," said a rabbit. "he wont find the high king at  cair paravel, you know.”
"hell find queen lucy," said duffle. "and then hullo! whats wrong with  the human? it looks pretty green. why, i do believe its quite faint. perhaps its mortal  hungry. when did you last have a meal, youngster?”
"yesterday morning," said shasta weakly.
"come on, then, come on," said the dwarf, at once throwing his thick little  arms round shastas waist to support him. "why, neighbours, we ought all to be ashamed  of ourselves! you come with me, lad. breakfast! better than talking.”
with a great deal of bustle, muttering reproaches to itself, the dwarf  half led and half supported shasta at a great speed further into the wood and a little  downhill. it was a longer walk than shasta wanted at that moment and his legs had begun to  feel very shaky before they came out from the trees on to bare hillside. there they found a  little house with a smoking chimney and an open door, and as they came to the doorway  duffle called out,  "hey, brothers! a visitor for breakfast.”
and immediately, mixed with a sizzling sound, there came to shasta a simply  delightful smell. it was one he had never smelled in his life before, but i hope you  have. it was, in fact, the smell of bacon and eggs and mushrooms all frying in a pan.
"mind your head, lad," said duffle a moment too late, for shasta had  already bashed his forehead against the low lintel of the door. "now," continued the dwarf,  "sit you down.
the tables a bit low for you, but then the stools low too. thats right.  and heres porridge - and heres a jug of cream - and heres a spoon.”
by the time shasta had finished his porridge, the dwarfs two brothers  (whose names were rogin and bricklethumb) were putting the dish of bacon and eggs and  mushrooms, and the coffee pot and the hot milk, and the toast, on the table.
it was all new and wonderful to shasta for calormene food is quite  different. he didnt even know what the slices of brown stuff were, for he had never seen toast  before. he didnt know what the yellow soft thing they smeared on the toast was,  because in calormen you nearly always get oil instead of butter. and the house itself  was quite different from the dark, frowsty, fish-smelling but of arsheesh and from  the pillared and carpeted halls in the palaces of tashbaan. the roof was very low, and  everything was made of wood, and there was a cuckoo-clock and a red-and-white checked  table-cloth and a bowl of wild flowers and little curtains on the thick-paned windows.  it was also rather troublesome having to use dwarf cups and plates and knives and  forks. this meant that helpings were very small, but then there were a great many helpings,  so that shastas plate or cup was being filled every moment, and every moment the dwarfs  themselves were saying, "butter please", or "another cup of coffee," or "id like a  few more mushrooms," or "what about frying another egg or so?" and when at last they  had all eaten as much as they possibly could the three dwarfs drew lots for who  would do the washing-up, and rogin was the unlucky one. then duffle and bricklethumb  took shasta outside to a bench which ran against the cottage wall, and they all  stretched out their legs and gave a great sigh of contentment and the two dwarfs lit their pipes.  the dew was off the grass now and the sun was warm; indeed, if there hadnt been a light  breeze, it would have been too hot.
"now, stranger," said duffle, "ill show you the lie of the land. you can  see nearly all south narnia from here, and were rather proud of the view. right away on  your left,  
beyond those near hills, you can just see the western mountains. and that  round hill away on your right is called the hill of the stone table. just beyond -”
but at that moment he was interrupted by a snore from shasta who, what with  his nights journey and his excellent breakfast, had gone fast asleep. the kindly  dwarfs, as soon as they noticed this, began making signs to each other not to wake him, and  indeed did so much whispering and nodding and getting up and -tiptoeing away that they  certainly would have waked him if he had been less tired.
he slept pretty well -nearly all day but woke up in time for supper. the  beds in that house were all too small for him but they made him a fine bed of heather on the  floor, and he never stirred nor dreamed all night. next morning they had just finished  breakfast when they heard a shrill, exciting sound from outside.
"trumpets!" said all the dwarfs, as they and shasta all came running out.
the trumpets sounded again: a new noise to shasta, not huge and solemn like  the horns of tashbaan nor gay and merry like king lunes hunting horn, but clear and  sharp and valiant. the noise was coming from the woods to the east, and soon there  was a noise of horse-hoofs mixed with it. a moment later the head of the column came into  sight.
first came the lord peridan on a bay horse carrying the great banner of  narnia - a red lion on a green ground. shasta knew him at once. then came three people  riding abreast, two on great chargers and one on a pony. the two on the chargers were king  edmund and a fair-haired lady with a very merry face who wore a helmet and a mail  shirt and carried a bow across her shoulder and a quiver full of arrows at her side.  ("the queen lucy," whispered duffle.) but the one on the pony was corin. after that  came the main body of the army: men on ordinary horses, men on talking horses (who didnt  mind being ridden on proper occasions, as when narnia went to war), centaurs,  stern, hard-bitten bears, great talking dogs, and last of all six giants. for there are  good giants in narnia. but though he knew they were on the right side shasta at first  could hardly bear to look at them; there are some things that take a lot of getting used to.
just as the king and queen reached the cottage and the dwarfs began making  low bows to them, king edmund called out,  "now, friends! time for a halt and a morsel!" and at once there was a great  bustle of people dismounting and haversacks being opened and conversation beginning  when corm came running up to shasta and seized both his hands and cried,  "what! you here! so you got through all right? i am glad. now we shall have  some sport.
and isnt it luck! we only got into harbour at cair paravel yesterday  morning and the very first person who met us was chervy the stag with all this news of an  attack on anvard. dont you think -”
"who is your highnesss friend?" said king edmund who had just got off his  horse.
"dont you see, sire?" said corin. "its my double: the boy you mistook me  for at tashbaan.”
"why, so he is your double," exclaimed queen lucy. "as like as two twins.  this is a marvellous thing.”
"please, your majesty," said shasta to king edmund, "i was no traitor,  really i wasnt.
and i couldnt help hearing your plans. but id never have dreamed of  telling them to your enemies.”
"i know now that you were no traitor, boy," said king edmund, laying his  hand on shastas head. "but if you would not be taken for one, another time try not  to hear whats meant for other ears. but alls well.”
after that there was so much bustle and talk and coming and going that  shasta for a few minutes lost sight of corin and edmund and lucy. but corin was the sort of  boy whom one is sure to hear of pretty soon and it wasnt very long before shasta  heard king edmund saying in a loud voice:  "by the lions mane, prince, this is too much! will your highness never be  better? you are more of a hearts-scald than our whole army together! id as lief have  a regiment of hornets in my command as you.”
shasta wormed his way through the crowd and there saw edmund, looking very  angry indeed, corin looking a little ashamed of himself, and a strange dwarf  sitting on the ground making faces. a couple of fauns had apparently just been helping it  out of its armour.
"if i had but my cordial with me," queen lucy was saying, "i could soon  mend this. but the high king has so strictly charged me not to carry it commonly to the  wars and to keep it only for great extremities!”
what had happened was this. as soon as corin had spoken to shasta, corins  elbow had been plucked by a dwarf in the army called thornbut.
"what is it, thornbut?" corin had said.
"your royal highness," said thornbut, drawing him aside, "our march today  will bring us through the pass and right to your royal fathers castle. we may be in  battle before night.”
"i know," said corin. "isnt it splendid!”
"splendid or not," said thornbut, "i have the strictest orders from king  edmund to see to it that your highness is not in the fight. you will be allowed to see it,  and thats treat enough for your highnesss little years.”
"oh what nonsense!" corin burst out. "of course im going to fight. why,  the queen lucys going to be with the archers.”
"the queens grace will do as she pleases," said thornbut. "but you are in  my charge.
either i must have your solemn and princely word that youll keep your pony  beside mine - not half a neck ahead - till i give your highness leave to depart: or  else - it is his majestys word - we must go with our wrists tied together like two  prisoners.”
"ill knock you down if you try to bind me," said corm.
"id like to see your highness do it," said the dwarf.
that was quite enough for a boy like corin and in a second he and the dwarf  were at it hammer and tongs. it would have been an even match for, though corin had  longer arms and more height, the dwarf was older and tougher. but it was never fought  out (thats the worst of fights on a rough hillside) for by very bad luck thornbut trod on  a loose stone, came flat down on his nose, and found when he tried to get up that he had  sprained his ankle: a real excruciating sprain which would keep him from walking or  riding for at least a fortnight.
"see what your highness has done," said king edmund. "deprived us of a  proved warrior on the very edge of battle.”
"ill take his place, sire," said corin.
"pshaw," said edmund. "no one doubts your courage. but a boy in battle is a  danger only to his own side.”
at that moment the king was called away to attend to something else, and  corin, after apologizing handsomely to the dwarf, rushed up to shasta and whispered,  "quick. theres a spare pony now, and the dwarfs armour. put it on before  anyone notices.”
"what for?" said shasta.
"why, so that you and i can fight in the battle of course! dont you want  to?”
"oh - ah, yes, of course," said shasta. but he hadnt been thinking of  doing so at all, and began to get a most uncomfortable prickly feeling in his spine.
"thats right," said corin. "over your head. now the sword-belt. but we  must ride near the tail of the column and keep as quiet as mice. once the battle begins  everyone will be far too busy to notice us.”

wＷw。xiabｏok.com



CHAPTER THIRTEEN

　小./说。txt天堂
the fight at anvard  by about eleven oclock the whole company was once more on the march,  riding westward with the mountains on their left. corin and shasta rode right at  the rear with the giants immediately in front of them. lucy and edmund and peridan were busy  with their plans for the battle and though lucy once said, "but where is his goosecap  highness?”
edmund only replied, "not in the front, and thats good news enough. leave  well alone.”
shasta told corin most of his adventures and explained that he had learned  all his riding from a horse and didnt really know how to use the reins. corin instructed  him in this, besides telling him all about their secret sailing from tashbaan.
"and where is the queen susan?”
"at cair paravel," said corin. "shes not like lucy, you know, whos as  good as a man, or at any rate as good as a boy. queen susan is more like an ordinary grown-up  lady. she doesnt ride to the wars, though she is an excellent archer.”
the hillside path which they were following became narrower all the time  and the drop on their right hand became steeper. at last they were going in single file  along the edge of a precipice and shasta shuddered to think that he had done the same last  night without knowing it. "but of course," he thought, "i was quite safe. that is why the  lion kept on my left. he was between me and the edge all the time.”
then the path went left and south away from the cliff and there were thick  woods on both sides of it and they went steeply up and up into the pass. there would have  been a splendid view from the top if it were open ground but among all those trees  you could see nothing - only, every now and then, some huge pinnacle of rock above the  tree-tops, and an eagle or two wheeling high up in the blue air.
"they smell battle," said corin, pointing at the birds. "they know were  preparing a feed for them.”
shasta didnt like this at all.
when they had crossed the neck of the pass and come a good deal lower they  reached more open ground and from here shasta could see all archenland, blue and  hazy, spread  
out below him and even (he thought) a hint of the desert beyond it. but the  sun, which had perhaps two hours or so to go before it set, was in his eyes and he  couldnt make things out distinctly.
here the army halted and spread out in a line, and there was a great deal  of rearranging. a whole detachment of very dangerous-looking talking beasts whom shasta had  not noticed before and who were mostly of the cat kind (leopards, panthers, and  the like)
went padding and growling to take up their positions on the left. the  giants were ordered to the right, and before going there they all took off something they had  been carrying on their backs and sat down for a moment. then shasta saw that what they had  been carrying and were now putting on were pairs of boots: horrid, heavy, spiked  boots which came up to their knees. then they sloped their huge clubs over their  shoulders and marched to their battle position. the archers, with queen lucy, fell to the  rear and you could first see them bending their bows and then hear the twangtwang as  they tested the strings. and wherever you looked you could see people tightening girths,  putting on helmets, drawing swords, and throwing cloaks to the ground. there was  hardly any talking now. it was very solemn and very dreadful. "im in for it now - i  really am in for it now," thought shasta. then there came noises far ahead: the sound of many  men shouting and a steady thud-thud-thud  "battering ram," whispered corin. "theyre battering the gate.”
even corin looked quite serious now.
"why doesnt king edmund get on?" he said. "i can stand this waiting  about. chilly too.”
shasta nodded: hoping he didnt look as frightened as felt.
the trumpet at last! on the move now - now trotting the banner streaming  out in the wind. they had topped low ridge now, and below them the whole scene sudden  opened out; a little, many-towered castle with its gate towards them. no moat,  unfortunately, but of course the gate shut and the portcullis down. on the walls they could  see, like little white dots, the faces of the defenders. down below, about fifty of the  calormenes, dismounted, were steadily swinging a great tree trunk against the gate. but  at once the scene changed. the main bulk of rabadashs men had been on foot ready to  assault the gate. but now he had seen the narnians sweeping down from the ridge. there  is no doubt those calormenes are wonderfully trained. it seemed to shasta only a second  before a whole line of the enemy were on horseback again, wheeling round to meet  them, swinging towards them.
and now a gallop. the ground between the two armies grew less every moment.  faster, faster. all swords out now, all shields up to the nose, all prayers said,  all teeth clenched.
shasta was dreadfully frightened. but it suddenly came into his head, "if  you funk this, youll funk every battle all your life. now or never.”
but when at last the two lines met he had really very littler idea of what  happened. there was a frightful confusion`; and an appalling noise. his sword was knocked  clean out of his hand pretty soon. and hed got the reins tangled somehow. then he found  himself slipping. then a spear came straight at him and as he ducked to avoid it he  rolled right off his horse, bashed his left knuckles terribly against someone elses armour,  and then - but it is no use trying to describe the battle from shastas point of view; he  understood too little of the fight in general and even of his own part in it. the best way  i can tell you what really happened is to take you some miles away to where the hermit of  the southern march sat gazing into the smooth pool beneath the spreading tree, with bree  and hwin and aravis beside him.
for it was in this pool that the hermit looked when he wanted to know what  was going on in the world outside the green walls of his hermitage. there, as in a  mirror, he could see, at certain times, what was going on in the streets of cities far  farther south than tashbaan, or what ships were putting into redhaven in the remote seven  isles, or what robbers or wild beasts stirred in the great western forests between lantern  waste and telmar. and all this day he had hardly left his pool, even to eat or drink,  for he knew that great events were on foot in archenland. aravis and the horses gazed into  it too. they could see it was a magic pool: instead of reflecting the tree and the sky  it revealed cloudy and coloured shapes moving, always moving, in its depths. but they could  see nothing clearly. the hermit could and from time to time he told them what he saw. a  little while before shasta rode into his first battle, the hermit had begun speaking  like this:  "i see one - two - three eagles wheeling in the gap by stormness head. one  is the oldest of all the eagles. he would not be out unless battle was at hand. i see him  wheel to and fro, peering down sometimes at anvard and sometimes to the east, behind  stormness. ah - i see now what rabadash and his men have been so busy at all day. they  have felled and lopped a great tree and they are now coming out of the woods carrying  it as a ram.
they have learned something from the failure of last nights assult. he  would have been wiser if he had set his men to making ladders: but it takes too long and he  is impatient.
fool that he is! he ought to have ridden back to tashbaan as soon as the  first attack failed, for his whole plan depended on speed and surprise. now they are  bringing their ram into position. king lunes men are shooting hard from the walls. five  calormenes have fallen: but not many will. they have their shields above their heads.  rabadash is giving his orders now. with him are his most trusted lords, fierce tarkaans  from the eastern provinces. i can see their faces. there is corradin of castle  tormunt, and azrooh, and chlamash, and ilgamuth of the twisted lip, and a tall tarkaan with a  crimson beard -”
"by the mane, my old master anradin!" said bree.
"s-s-sly" said aravis.
"now the ram has started. if i could hear as well as see, what a noise that  would make!
stroke after stroke: and no gate can stand it for ever. but wait! something  up by stormness has scared the birds. theyre coming out in masses. and wait  again . . . i cant see yet . . . ah! now i can. the whole ridge, up on the east, is black with  horsemen. if  
only the wind would catch that standard and spread it out. theyre over the  ridge now, whoever they are. aha! ive seen the banner now. narnia, narnia! its the  red lion.
theyre in full career down the hill now. i can see king edmund. theres a  woman behind among the archers. oh! -”
"what is it?" asked hwin breathlessly.
"all his cats are dashing out from the left of the line.”
"cats?" said aravis.
"great cats, leopards and such," said the hermit impatiently. "i see, i  see. the cats are coming round in a circle to get at the horses of the dismounted men. a good  stroke. the calormene horses are mad with terror already. now the cats are in among  them. but rabadash has reformed his line and has a hundred men in the saddle. theyre  riding to meet the narnians. theres only a hundred yards between the two lines now.  only fifty. i can see king edmund, i can see the lord peridan. there are two mere  children in the narnian line. what can the king be about to let them into battle? only ten  yards - the lines have met. the giants on the narnian right are doing wonders . . . but  ones down . . .
shot through the eye, i suppose. the centres all in a muddle. i can see  more on the left.
there are the two boys again. lion alive! one is prince corm. the other,  like him as two peas. its your little shasta. corm is fighting like a man. hes killed a  calormene. i can see a bit of the centre now. rabadash and edmund almost met then, but the  press has separated them -”
"what about shasta?" said aravis.
"oh the fool!" groaned the hermit. "poor, brave little fool. he knows  nothing about this work. hes making no use at all of his shield. his whole sides exposed. he  hasnt the faintest idea what to do with his sword. oh, hes remembered it now. hes  waving it wildly about . . . nearly cut his own ponys head off, and he will in a  moment if hes not careful. its been knocked out of his hand now. its mere murder sending a  child into the battle; he cant live five minutes. duck you fool - oh, hes down.”
"killed?" asked three voices breathlessly.
"how can i tell?" said the hermit. "the cats have done their work. all the  riderless horses are dead or escaped now: no retreat for the calormenes on them. now  the cats are turning back into the main battle. theyre leaping on the rams-men. the ram  is down. oh, good! good! the gates are opening from the inside: theres going to be a  sortie. the first three are out. its king lune in the middle: the brothers dar and darrin on  each side of him. behind them are tran and shar and cole with his brother colin. there  are ten - twenty - nearly thirty of them out by now. the calormen line is being  forced back upon them. king edmund is dealing marvellous strokes. hes just slashed  corradins head off.
lots of calormenes have thrown down their arms and are running for the  woods. those that remain are hard pressed. the giants are closing in on the right - cats  on the left -  
king lune from their rear. the calormenes are a little knot now, fighting  back to back.
your tarkaans down, bree. lune and azrooh are fighting hand to hand; the  king looks like winning - the king is keeping it up well - the king has won. azroohs  down. king edmunds down - no, hes up again: hes at it with rabadash. theyre  fighting in the very gate of the castle. several calormenes have surrendered. darrin has killed  ilgamuth. i cant see whats happened to rabadash. i think hes dead, leaning against  the castle wall, but i dont know. chlamash and king edmund are still fighting but the  battle is over everywhere else. chlamash has surrendered. the battle is over. the  calormenes are utterly defeated.”
when shasta fell off his horse he gave himself up for lost. but horses,  even in battle, tread on human beings very much less than you would suppose. after a very  horrible ten minutes or so shasta realized suddenly that there were no longer any horses  stamping about in the immediate neighbourhood and that the noise (for there were  still a good many noises going on) was no longer that of a battle. he sat up and stared  about him.
even he, little as he knew of battles, could soon see that the  archenlanders and narnians had won. the only living calormenes he could see were prisoners, the castle  gates were wide open, and king lune and king edmund were shaking hands across the  battering ram. from the circle of lords and warriors around them there arose a sound  of breathless and excited, but obviously cheerful conversation. and then, suddenly, it  all united and swelled into a great roar of laughter.
shasta. picked himself up, feeling uncommonly stiff, and ran towards the  sound to see what the joke was. a very curious sight met his eyes. the unfortunate  rabadash appeared to be suspended from the castle walls. his feet, which were about two feet  from the ground, were kicking wildly. his chain-shirt was somehow hitched up so that  it was horribly tight under the arms and came half way over his face. in fact he  looked just as a man looks if you catch him in the very act of getting into a stiff shirt  that is a little too small for him. as far as could be made out afterwards (and you may be sure  the story was well talked over for many a day) what happened was something like this.  early in the battle one of the giants had made an unsuccessful stamp at rabadash with  his spiked boot: unsuccessful because it didnt crush rabadash, which was what the  giant had intended, but not quite useless because one of the spikes tore the chain  mail, just as you or i might tear an ordinary shirt. so rabadash, by the time he encountered  edmund at the gate, had a hole in the back of his hauberk. and when edmund pressed him  back nearer and nearer to the wall, he jumped up on a mounting block and stood there  raining down blows on edmund from above. but then, finding that this position, by  raising him above the heads of everyone else, made him a mark for every arrow from the  narnian bows, he decided to jump down again. and he meant to look and sound - no doubt for a  moment he did look and sound - very grand and very dreadful as he jumped, crying,  "the bolt of tash falls from above." but he had to jump sideways because the crowd in  front of him left him no landing place in that direction. and then, in the neatest way  you could wish, the tear in the back of his hauberk caught on a hook in the wall. (ages ago  this hook had had a ring in it for tying horses to.) and there he found himself, like a  piece of washing hung up to dry, with everyone laughing at him.
"let me down, edmund," howled rabadash. "let me down and fight me like a  king and a man; or if you are too great a coward to do that, kill me at once.”
"certainly," began king edmund, but king lune interrupted.
"by your majestys good leave," said king lune to edmund. "not so." then  turning to rabadash he said, "your royal highness, if you had given that challenge a  week ago, ill answer for it there was no one in king edmunds dominion, from the high  king down to the smallest talking mouse, who would have refused it. but by attacking our  castle of anvard in time of peace without defiance sent, you have proved yourself no  knight, but a traitor, and one rather to be whipped by the hangman than to be suffered to  cross swords with any person of honour. take him down, bind him, and carry him within  till our pleasure is further known.”
strong hands wrenched rabadashs sword from him and he was carried away  into the castle, shouting, threatening, cursing, and even crying. for though he  could have faced torture he couldnt bear being made ridiculous. in tashbaan everyone had  always taken him seriously.
at that moment corin ran up to shasta, seized his hand and started dragging  him towards king lune. "here he is, father, here he is," cried corin.
"aye, and here thou art, at last," said the king in a very gruff voice.  "and bast been in the battle, clean contrary to your obedience. a boy to break a fathers heart!  at your age a rod to your breech were fitter than a sword in your fist, ha!" but everyone,  including corin, could see that the king was very proud of him.
"chide him no more, sire, if it please you," said lord darrin. "his  highness would not be your son if he did not inherit your conditions. it would grieve your  majesty more if he had to be reproved for the opposite fault.”
"well, well," grumbled the king. "well pass it over for this time. and now  -"   what came next surprised shasta as much as anything that had ever happened  to him in his life. he found himself suddenly embraced inn bear-like hug by king lune  and kissed on both cheeks. then the king set him down again and said, "stand here  together, boys, and let all the court see you. hold up your heads. now, gentlemen, look on  them both.
has any man any doubts?”
and still shasta could not understand why everyone stared at him and at  corin nor what all the cheering was about.





CHAPTER FOURTEEN

小*说**t*xt**天*堂
how bree became a wiser horse  we must now return to aravis and the horses. the hermit, watching his pool,  was able to tell them that shasta was not killed or even seriously wounded, for he  saw him get up and saw how affectionately he was greeted by king lune. but as he could  only see, not hear, he did not know what anyone was saying and, once the fighting had  stopped and the talking had begun, it was not worth while looking in the pool any longer.
next morning, while the hermit was indoors, the three of them discussed  what they should do next.
"ive had enough of this," said hwin. "the hermit has been very good to us  and im very much obliged to him im sure. but im getting as fat as a pet pony, eating  all day and getting no exercise. lets go on to narnia.”
"oh not today, maam," said bree. "i wouldnt hurry things. some other day,  dont you think?”
"we must see shasta first and say good-bye to him - and - and apologize,"  said aravis.
"exactly!" said bree with great enthusiasm. "just what i was going to say.”
"oh, of course," said hwin. "i expect he is in anvard. naturally wed look  in on him and say good-bye. but thats on our way. and why shouldnt we start at once?  after all, i thought it was narnia we all wanted to get to?”
"i suppose so," said aravis. she was beginning to wonder what exactly she  would do when she got there and was feeling a little lonely.
"of course, of course," said bree hastily. "but theres no need to rush  things, if you know what i mean.”
"no, i dont know what you mean," said hwin. "why dont you want to go?”
"m-m-m, broo-hoo," muttered bree. "well, dont you see, maam - its an  important occasion - returning to ones country - entering society - the best society  - it is so essential to make a good impression - not perhaps looking quite ourselves, yet, eh?”
hwin broke out into a horse-laugh. "its your tail, bree! i see it all now.  you want to wait till your tails grown again! and we dont even know if tails are worn long  in narnia.
really, bree, youre as vain as that tarkheena in tashbaan!”
"you are silly, bree," said aravis.
"by the lions mane, tarkheena, im nothing of the sort," said bree  indignantly. "i have a proper respect for myself and for my fellow horses, thats all.”
"bree," said aravis, who was not very interested in the cut of his tail,  "ive been wanting to ask you something for a long time. why do you keep on swearing by the  lion and by the lions mane? i thought you hated lions.”
"so i do," answered bree. "but when i speak of the lion of course i mean  aslan, the great deliverer of narnia who drove away the witch and the winter. all  narnians swear by him.”
"but is he a lion?”
"no, no, of course not," said bree in a rather shocked voice.
"all the stories about him in tashbaan say he is," replied aravis. "and if  he isnt a lion why do you call him a lion?”
"well, youd hardly understand that at your age," said bree. "and i was  only a little foal when i left so i dont quite fully understand it myself.”
(bree was standing with his back to the green wall while he said this, and  the other two were facing him. he was talking in rather a superior tone with his eyes  half shut; that was why he didnt see the changed expression in the faces of hwin and aravis.  they had good reason to have open mouths and staring eyes; because while bree spoke they  saw an enormous lion leap up from outside and balance itself on the top of the  green wall; only it was a brighter yellow and it was bigger and more beautiful and more  alarming than any lion they had ever seen. and at once it jumped down inside the wall and  began approaching bree from behind. it made no noise at all. and hwin and aravis  couldnt make any noise themselves, no more than if they were frozen.)
"no doubt," continued bree, "when they speak of him as a lion they only  mean hes as strong as a lion or (to our enemies, of course) as fierce as a lion. or  something of that kind. even a little girl like you, aravis, must see that it would be quite  absurd to suppose he is a real lion. indeed it would be disrespectful. if he was a lion hed  have to be a beast just like the rest of us. why!" (and here bree began to laugh) "if he was a  lion hed have four paws, and a tail, and whiskers! . . . aie, ooh, hoo-hoo! help!”
for just as he said the word whiskers one of aslans had actually tickled  his ear. bree shot away like an arrow to the other side of the enclosure and there  turned; the wall was too high for him to jump and he could fly no farther. aravis and hwin both  started back.
there was about a second of intense silence.
then hwin, though shaking all over, gave a strange little neigh, and  trotted across to the lion.
"please," she said, "youre so beautiful. you may eat me if you like. id  sooner be eaten by you than fed by anyone else.”
"dearest daughter," said aslan, planting a lions kiss on her twitching,  velvet nose, "i knew you would not be long in coming to me. joy shall be yours.”
then he lifted his head and spoke in a louder voice.
"now, bree," he said, "you poor, proud frightened horse, draw near. nearer  still, my son.
do not dare not to dare. touch me. smell me. here are my paws, here is my  tail, these are my whiskers. i am a true beast.”
"aslan," said bree in a shaken voice, "im afraid i must be rather a fool.”
"happy the horse who knows that while he is still young. or the human  either. draw near, aravis my daughter. see! my paws are velveted. you will not be torn  this time.”
"this time, sir?" said aravis.
"it was i who wounded you," said aslan. "i am the only lion you met in all  your journeyings. do you know why i tore you?”
"no, sir.”
"the scratches on your back, tear for tear, throb for throb, blood for  blood, were equal to the stripes laid on the back of your stepmothers slave because of the  drugged sleep you cast upon her. you needed to know what it felt like.”
"yes, sir. please-”
"ask on, my dear," said aslan.
"will any more harm come to her by what i did?”
"child," said the lion, "i am telling you your story, not hers. no one is  told any story but their own." then he shook his head and spoke in a lighter voice.
"be merry, little ones," he said. "we shall meet soon again. but before  that you will have another visitor." then in one bound he reached the top of the wall and  vanished from their sight.
strange to say, they felt no inclination to talk to one another about him  after he had gone.
they all moved slowly away to different parts of the quiet grass and there  paced to and fro, each alone, thinking.
about half an hour later the two horses were summoned to the back of the  house to eat something nice that the hermit had got ready for them and aravis, still  walking and thinking, was startled by the harsh sound of a trumpet outside the gate.
"who is there?" asked aravis.
"his royal highness prince cor of archenland," said a voice from outside.
aravis undid the door and opened it, drawing back a little way to let the  strangers in.
two soldiers with halberds came first and took their stand at each side of  the entry. then followed a herald, and the trumpeter.
"his royal highness prince cor of archenland desires an audience of the  lady aravis,”
said the herald. then he and the trumpeter drew aside and bowed and the  soldiers saluted and the prince himself came in. all his attendants withdrew and closed the  gate behind them.
the prince bowed, and a very clumsy bow for a prince it was. aravis  curtsied in the calormene style (which is not at all like ours) and did it very well  because, of course, she had been taught how. then she looked up and saw what sort of person this  prince was.
she saw a mere boy. he was bare-headed and his fair hair was encircled with  a very thin band of gold, hardly thicker than a wire. his upper tunic was of white  cambric, as fine as a handkerchief, so that the bright red tunic beneath it showed through. his  left hand, which rested on his enamelled sword hilt, was bandaged.
aravis looked twice at his face before she gasped and said, "why! its  shasta!”
shasta all at once turned very red and began speaking very quickly. "look  here, aravis,”
he said, "i do hope you wont think im got up like this (and the trumpeter  and all) to try to impress you or make out that im different or any rot of that sort.  because id far rather have come in my old clothes, but theyre burnt now, and my father said -”
"your father?" said aravis.
"apparently king lune is my father," said shasta. "i might really have  guessed it. corin being so like me. we were twins, you see. oh, and my name isnt shasta,  its cor.”
"cor is a nicer name than shasta," said aravis.
"brothers names run like that in archenland," said shasta (or prince cor  as we must now call him). "like dar and darrin, cole and colin and so on.”
"shasta - i mean cor," said aravis. "no, shut up. theres something ive  got to say at once. im sorry ive been such a pig. but i did change before i knew you  were a prince, honestly i did: when you went back, and faced the lion.”
"it wasnt really going to kill you at all, that lion," said cor.
"i know," said aravis, nodding. both were still and solemn for a moment as  each saw that the other knew about aslan.
suddenly aravis remembered cors bandaged hand. "i say!" she cried, "i  forgot! youve been in a battle. is that a wound?”
"a mere scratch," said cor, using for the first time a rather lordly tone.  but a moment later he burst out laughing and said, "if you want to know the truth, it  isnt a proper wound at all. i only took the skin off my knuckles just as any clumsy fool  might do without going near a battle.”
"still you were in the battle," said aravis. "it must have been wonderful.”
"it wasnt at all like what i thought," said cor.
"but sha - cor, i mean - you havent told me anything yet about king lune  and how he found out who you were.”
"well, lets sit down," said cor. "for its rather a long story. and by the  way, fathers an absolute brick. id be just as pleased - or very nearly - at finding hes  my father even if he wasnt a king. even though education and all sorts of horrible things are  going to happen to me. but you want the story. well, corin and i were twins. and about a  week after we were both born, apparently, they took us to a wise old centaur in narnia to  be blessed or something. now this centaur was a prophet as a good many centaurs are.  perhaps you havent seen any centaurs yet? there were some in the battle yesterday.  most remarkable people, but i cant say i feel quite at home with them yet. i say, aravis,  there are going to be a lot of things to get used to in these northern countries.”
"yes, there are," said aravis. "but get on with the story.”
"well, as soon as he saw corin and me, it seems this centaur looked at me  and said, a day will come when that boy will save archenland from the deadliest danger  in which ever she lay. so of course my father and mother were very pleased. but  there was someone present who wasnt. this was a chap called the lord bar who had  been fathers lord chancellor. and apparently hed done something wrong - bezzling or  some word like that - i didnt understand that part very well - and father had had to  dismiss him. but nothing else was done to him and he was allowed to go on living in  archenland. but he must have been as bad as he could be, for it came out afterwards he had  been in the pay of the tisroc and had sent a lot of secret information to tashbaan. so as  soon as he heard i was going to save archenland from a great danger he decided i must be put  out of the  
way. well, he succeeded in kidnapping me (i dont exactly know how) and  rode away down the winding arrow to the coast. hed had everything prepared and there  was a ship manned with his own followers lying ready for him and he put out to sea  with me on board. but father got wind of it, though not quite in time, and was after  him as quickly as he could. the lord bar was already at sea when father reached the coast,  but not out of sight. and father was embarked in one of his own warships within twenty  minutes.
"it must have been a wonderful chase. they were six days following bars  galleon and brought her to battle on the seventh. it was a great sea-fight (i heard a  lot about it yesterday evening) from ten oclock in the morning till sunset. our people  took the ship in the end. but i wasnt there. the lord bar himself had been killed in the  battle. but one of his men said that, early that morning, as soon as he saw he was certain  to be overhauled, bar had given me to one of his knights and sent us both away in  the ships boat. and that boat was never seen again. but of course that was the same  boat that aslan (he seems to be at the back of all the stories) pushed ashore at the right  place for arsheesh to pick me up. i wish i knew that knights name, for he must have  kept me alive and starved himself to do it.”
"i suppose aslan would say that was part of someone elses story," said  aravis.
"i was forgetting that," said cor.
"and i wonder how the prophecy will work out," said aravis, "and what the  great danger is that youre to save archenland from.”
"well," said cor rather awkwardly, "they seem to think ive done it  already.”
aravis clapped her hands. "why, of course!" she said. "how stupid i am. and  how wonderful! archenland can never be in much greater danger than it was when  rabadash had crossed the arrow with his two hundred horse and you hadnt yet got  through with your message. dont you feel proud?”
"i think i feel a bit scared," said cor.
"and youll be living at anvard now," said aravis rather wistfully.
"oh!" said cor, "id nearly forgotten what i came about. father wants you  to come and live with us. he says theres been no lady in the court (they call it the  court, i dont know why) since mother died. do, aravis. youll like father - and corin. theyre  not like me; theyve been properly brought up. you neednt be afraid that -”
"oh stop it," said aravis, "or well have a real fight. of course ill  come.”
"now lets go and see the horses," said cor.
there was a great and joyous meeting between bree and cor, and bree, who  was still in a rather subdued frame of mind, agreed to set out for anvard at once: he and  hwin would cross into narnia on the following day. all four bade an affectionate  farewell to the hermit and promised that they would soon visit him again. by about the  middle of the morning they were on their way. the horses had expected that aravis and cor  would ride, but cor explained that except in war, where everyone must do what he  can do best, no one in narnia or archenland ever dreamed of mounting a talking horse.
this reminded poor bree again of how little he knew about narnian customs  and what dreadful mistakes he might make. so while hwin strolled along in a happy  dream, bree got more nervous and more self-conscious with every step he took.
"buck up, bree," said cor. "its far worse for me than for you. you arent  going to be educated. i shall be learning reading and writing and heraldry and dancing  and history and music while youll be galloping and rolling on the hills of narnia to  your hearts content.”
"but thats just the point," groaned bree. "do talking horses roll?  supposing they dont?
i cant bear to give it up. what do you think, hwin?”
"im going to roll anyway," said hwin. "i dont suppose any of them will  care two lumps of sugar whether you roll or not.”
"are we near that castle?" said bree to cor.
"round the next bend," said the prince.
"well," said bree, "im going to have a good one now: it may be the last.  wait for me a minute.”
it was five minutes before he rose again, blowing hard and covered with  bits of bracken.
"now im ready," he said in a voice of profound gloom. "lead on, prince  cor, narnia and the north.”
but he looked more like a horse going to a funeral than a long-lost captive  returning to home and freedom.





CHAPTER FIFTEEN

www.xiaboＯk.com
rabadash the ridiculous   
the next turn of the road- brought them out from among the trees and there,  across green lawns, sheltered from the north wind by the high wooded ridge at its  back, they saw the castle of anvard. it was very old and built of a warm, reddish-brown  stone.
before they had reached the gate king lune came out to meet them, not  looking at all like araviss idea of a king and wearing the oldest of old clothes; for he  had just come from making a round of the kennels with his huntsman and had only stopped  for a moment to wash his doggy hands. but the bow with which he greeted aravis as  he took her hand would have been stately enough for an emperor.
"little lady," he said, "we bid you very heartily welcome. if my dear wife  were still alive we could make you better cheer but could not do it with a better will. and  i am sorry that you have had misfortunes and been driven from your fathers house, which  cannot but be a grief to you. my son cor has told me about your adventures together and  all your valour.”
"it was he who did all that, sir," said aravis. "why, he rushed at a lion  to save me.”
"eh, whats that?" said king lune, his face brightening. "i havent heard  that part of the story.”
then aravis told it. and cor, who had very much wanted the story to be  known, though he felt he couldnt tell it himself, didnt enjoy it so much as he had  expected, and indeed felt rather foolish. but his father enjoyed it very much indeed and in the  course of the next few weeks told it to so many people that cor wished it had never  happened.
then the king turned to hwin and bree and was just as polite to them as to  aravis, and asked them a lot of questions about their families and where they had lived  in narnia before they had been captured. the horses were rather tongue-tied for they  werent yet used to being talked to as equals by humans grown-up humans, that is. they  didnt mind aravis and cor.
presently queen lucy came out from the castle and joined them and king lune  said to aravis, "my dear, here is a loving friend of our house, and she has been  seeing that your apartments are put to rights for you better than i could have done it.”
"youd like to come and see them, wouldnt you?" said lucy, kissing aravis.  they liked each other at once and soon went away together to talk about araviss  bedroom and araviss boudoir and about getting clothes for her, and all the sort of  things girls do talk about on such an occasion.
after lunch, which they had on the terrace (it was cold birds and cold game  pie and wine and bread and cheese), king lune ruffled up his brow and heaved a sigh and  said, "heigh-ho! we have still that sorry creature rabadash on our hands, my  friends, and must needs resolve what to do with him.”
lucy was sitting on the kings right and aravis on his left. king edmund  sat at one end of the table and the lord darrin faced him at the other. dar and peridan  and cor and corin were on the same side as the king.
"your majesty would have a perfect right to strike off his head," said  peridan. "such an assault as he made puts him on a level with assassins.”
"it is very true," said edmund. "but even a traitor may mend. i have known  one that did.”
and he looked very thoughtful.
"to kill this rabadash would go near to raising war with the tisroc," said  darrin.
"a fig for the tisroc," said king lune. "his strength is in numbers and  numbers will never cross the desert. but i have no stomach for killing men (even  traitors) in cold blood. to have cut his throat in the battle would have eased my heart  mightily, but this is a different thing.”
"by my counsel," said lucy, "your majesty shall give him another trial. let  him go free on strait promise of fair dealing in the future. it may be that he will  keep his word.”
"maybe apes will grow honest, sister," said edmund. "but, by the lion, if  he breaks it again, may it be in such time and place that any of us could swap off his  head in clean battle.”
"it shall be tried," said the king: and then to one of the attendants,  "send for the prisoner, friend.”
rabadash was brought before them in chains. to look at him anyone would  have supposed that he had passed the night in a noisome dungeon without food or  water; but in reality he had been shut up in quite a comfortable room and provided with  an excellent supper. but as he was sulking far too furiously to touch the supper and had  spent the whole night stamping and roaring and cursing, he naturally did not now look  his best.
"your royal highness needs not to be told," said king lune, "that by the  law of nations as well as by all reasons of prudent policy, we have as good right to your  head as ever one mortal man had against another. nevertheless, in consideration of your  youth and the ill nurture, devoid of all gentilesse and courtesy, which you have  doubtless had in the land of slaves and tyrants, we are disposed to set you free, unharmed, on  these conditions: first, that-”
"curse you for a barbarian dog!" spluttered rabadash. "do you think i will  even hear your conditions? faugh! you talk very largely of nurture and i know not  what. its easy, to a man in chains, ha! take off these vile bonds, give me a sword, and let  any of you who dares then debate with me.”
nearly all the lords sprang to their feet, and corin shouted:  
"father! can i box him? please.”
"peace! your majesties! my lords!" said king lune. "have we no more gravity  among us than to be so chafed by the taunt of a pajock? sit down, corin, or shaft  leave the table.
i ask your highness again, to hear our conditions.”
"i hear no conditions from barbarians and sorcerers," said rabadash. "not  one of you dare touch a hair of my head. every insult you have heaped on me shall be  paid with oceans of narnian and archenlandish blood. terrible shall the vengeance of  the tisroc be: even now. but kill me, and the burnings and torturings in these  northern lands shall become a tale to frighten the world a thousand years hence. beware! beware!  beware!
the bolt of tash falls from above!”
"does it ever get caught on a hook half-way?" asked corin.
"shame, corin," said the king. "never taunt a man save when he is stronger  than you: then, as you please.”
"oh you foolish rabadash," sighed lucy.
next moment cor wondered why everyone at the table had risen and was  standing perfectly still. of course he did the same himself. and then he saw the  reason. aslan was among them though no one had seen him coming. rabadash started as the  immense shape of the lion paced softly in between him and his accusers.
"rabadash," said aslan. "take heed. your doom is very near, but you may  still avoid it.
forget your pride (what have you to be proud of?) and your anger (who has  done you wrong?) and accept the mercy of these good kings.”
then rabadash rolled his eyes and spread out his mouth into a horrible,  long mirthless grin like a shark, and wagged his ears up and down (anyone can learn how to  do this if they take the trouble). he had always found this very effective in  calormen. the bravest had trembled when he made these faces, and ordinary people had fallen to  the floor, and sensitive people had often fainted. but what rabadash hadnt realized is  that it is very easy to frighten people who know you can have them boiled alive the moment  you give the word. the grimaces didnt look at all alarming in archenland; indeed  lucy only thought rabadash was going to be sick.
"demon! demon! demon!" shrieked the prince. "i know you. you are the foul  fiend of narnia. you are the enemy of the gods. learn who i am, horrible phantasm. i  am descended from tash, the inexorable, the irresistible. the curse of tash is  upon you.
lightning in the shape of scorpions shall be rained on you. the mountains  of narnia shall be ground into dust. the-”
"have a care, rabadash," said aslan quietly. "the doom is nearer now: it is  at the door: it has lifted the latch.”
"let the skies fall," shrieked rabadash. "let the earth gape! let blood and  fire obliterate the world! but be sure i will never desist till i have dragged to my palace  by her hair the barbarian queen, the daughter of dogs, the -”
"the hour has struck," said aslan: and rabadash saw, to his supreme horror,  that everyone had begun to laugh.
they couldnt help it. rabadash had been wagging his ears all the time and  as soon as aslan said, "the hour has struck!" the ears began to change. they grew  longer and more pointed and soon were covered with grey hair. and while everyone was  wondering where they had seen ears like that before, rabadashs face began to change too.  it grew longer, and thicker at the top and larger eyed, and the nose sank back into the  face (or else the face swelled out and became all nose) and there was hair all over it. and  his arms grew longer and came down in front of him till his hands were resting on the  ground: only they werent hands, now, they were hoofs. and he was standing on all fours, and  his clothes disappeared, and everyone laughed louder and louder (because they couldnt  help it) for now what had been rabadash was, simply and unmistakably, a donkey. the  terrible thing was that his human speech lasted just a moment longer than his human shape,  so that when he realized the change that was coming over him, he screamed out:  "oh, not a donkey! mercy! if it were even a horse - een - a hor - eeh -  auh, eeh-auh.”
and so the words died away into a donkeys bray.
"now hear me, rabadash," said aslan. "justice shall be mixed with mercy.  you shall not always be an ass.”
at this of course the donkey twitched its ears forward and that also was so  funny that everybody laughed all the more. they tried not to, but they tried in vain.
"you have appealed to tash," said aslan. "and in the temple of tash you  shall be healed.
you must stand before the altar of tash in tashbaan at the great autumn  feast this year and there, in the sight of all tashbaan, your asss shape will fall from  you and all men will know you for prince rabadash. but as long as you live, if ever you go  more than ten miles away from the great temple in tashbaan you shall instantly become  again as you now are. and from that second change there will be no return.”
there was a short silence and then they all stirred and looked at one  another as if they were waking from sleep. aslan was gone. but there was a brightness in the  air and on the grass, and a joy in their hearts, which assured them that he had been no  dream: and anyway, there was the donkey in front of them.
king lune was the kindest-hearted of men and on seeing his enemy in this  regrettable condition he forgot all his anger.
"your royal highness," he said. "i am most truly sorry that things have  come to this extremity. your highness will bear witness that it was none of our doing.  and of course we shall be delighted to provide your highness with shipping back to  tashbaan for the - er - treatment which aslan has prescribed. you shall have every comfort  which your highnesss situation allows: the best of the cattleboats - the freshest  carrots and thistles -”
but a deafening bray from the donkey and a well-aimed kick at one of the  guards made it clear that these kindly offers were ungratefully received.
and here, to get him out of the way, id better finish off the story of  rabadash. he (or it)
was duly sent back by boat to tashbaan and brought into the temple of tash  at the great autumn festival, and then he became a man again. but of course four or five  thousand people had seen the transformation and the affair could not possibly be  hushed up. and after the old tisrocs death when rabadash became tisroc in his place he  turned out the most peaceable tisroc calormen had ever known. this was because, not daring  to go more than ten miles from tashbaan, he could never go on a war himself: and  he didnt want his tarkaans to win fame in the wars at his expense, for that is the  way tisrocs get overthrown. but though his reasons were selfish, it made things much more  comfortable for all the smaller countries round calormen. his own people never forgot  that he had been a donkey. during his reign, and to his face, he was called rabadash  the peacemaker, but after his death and behind his back he was called rabadash the  ridiculous, and if you look him up in a good history of calormen (try the local library) you will  find him under that name. and to this day in calormene schools, if you do anything  unusually stupid, you are very likely to be called "a second rabadash".
meanwhile at anvard everyone was very glad that he had been disposed of  before the real fun began, which was a grand feast held that evening on the lawn  before the castle, with dozens of lanterns to help the moonlight. and the wine flowed and  tales were told and jokes were cracked, and then silence was made and the kings poet with  two fiddlers stepped out into the middle of the circle. aravis and cor prepared  themselves to be bored, for the only poetry they knew was the calormene kind, and you know now what  that was like. but at the very first scrape of the fiddles a rocket seemed to go up  inside their heads, and the poet sang the great old lay of fair olvin and how he fought the  giant pire and turned him into stone (and that is the origin of mount pire - it was a two -headed giant)
and won the lady liln for his bride; and when it was over they wished it  was going to begin again. and though bree couldnt sing he told the story of the fight  at zalindreh.
and lucy told again (they had all, except aravis and cor, heard it many  times but they all wanted it again) the tale of the wardrobe and how she and king edmund  and queen susan and peter the high king had first come into narnia.
and presently, as was certain to happen sooner or later, king lune said if  was time for young people to be in bed. "and tomorrow, cor," he added, "shalt come over  all the castle with me and see the estres and mark all its strength and weakness:  for it will be thine to guard when im gone.”
"but corin will be the king then, father," said cor.
"nay, lad," said king lune, "thou art my heir. the crown comes to thee.”
"but i dont want it," said cor. "id far rather-”
"tis no question what thou wantest, cor, nor i either. tis in the course  of law.”
"but if were twins we must be the same age.”
"nay," said the king with a laugh. "one must come first. art corins elder  by full twenty minutes. and his better too, lets hope, though thats no great mastery."  and he looked at corin with a twinkle in his eyes.
"but, father, couldnt you make whichever you like to be the next king?”
"no. the kings under the law, for its the law makes him a king. hast no  more power to start away from thy crown than any sentry from his post.”
"oh dear," said cor. "i dont want to at all. and corin - i am most  dreadfully sorry. i never dreamed my turning up was going to chisel you out of your kingdom.”
"hurrah! hurrah!" said corin. "i shant have to be king. i shant have to  be king. ill always be a prince. its princes have all the fun.”
"and thats truer than thy brother knows, cor," said king lune. "for this  is what it means to be a king: to be first in every desperate attack and last in every  desperate retreat, and when theres hunger in the land (as must be now and then in bad years) to  wear finer clothes and laugh louder over a scantier meal than any man in your land.”
when the two boys were going upstairs to bed cor again asked corin if  nothing could be done about it. and corin said:  "if you say another word about it, ill - ill knock you down.”
it would be nice to end the story by saying that after that the two  brothers never disagreed about anything again, but i am afraid it would not be true. in reality they  quarrelled and fought just about as often as any other two boys would, and all their  fights ended (if they didnt begin) with cor getting knocked down. for though, when they had both  grown up and become swordsmen, cor was the more dangerous man in battle, neither he  nor anyone else in the north countries could ever equal corin as a boxer. that  was how he got his name of corin thunder-fist; and how he performed his great exploit  against the lapsed bear of stormness, which was really a talking bear but had gone back  to wild bear habits. corm climbed up to its lair on the narnian side of stormness  one winter day when the snow was on the hills and boxed it without a time-keeper for  thirty-three rounds. and at the end it couldnt see out of its eyes and became a  reformed character.
aravis also had many quarrels (and, im afraid, even fights) with cor, but  they always made it up again: so that years later, when they were grown up, they were  so used to quarrelling and making it up again that they got married so as to go on  doing it more conveniently. and after king lunes death they made a good king and queen  of archenland and ram the great, the most famous of all the kings of  archenland, was their son. bree and hwin lived happily to a great age in narnia and both got  married but not to one another. and there werent many months in which one or both of them  didnt come trotting over the pass to visit their friends at anvard.

www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ

 