《The Lion, the Witch and the War》查看《The Lion, the Witch and the War》书评和最新更新以及相关书籍推荐请到《The Lion, the Witch and the War》专题网址http://www.xiabook.com/waiguo/2124/ 
  



CHAPTER ONE

小xiaoshuo说txt天堂
lucy looks into a wardrobe  
once there were four children whose names were peter, susan, edmund and  lucy. this story is about something that happened to them when they were sent away  from london during the war because of the air-raids. they were sent to the house of an  old professor who lived in the heart of the country, ten miles from the nearest railway  station and two miles from the nearest post office. he had no wife and he lived in a very  large house with a housekeeper called mrs macready and three servants. (their names were  ivy, margaret and betty, but they do not come into the story much.) he himself was a very  old man with shaggy white hair which grew over most of his face as well as on his  head, and they liked him almost at once; but on the first evening when he came out to meet  them at the front door he was so odd-looking that lucy (who was the youngest) was a  little afraid of him, and edmund (who was the next youngest) wanted to laugh and had to keep  on pretending he was blowing his nose to hide it.
as soon as they had said good night to the professor and gone upstairs on  the first night, the boys came into the girls room and they all talked it over.
"weve fallen on our feet and no mistake," said peter. "this is going to be  perfectly splendid. that old chap will let us do anything we like.”
"i think hes an old dear," said susan.
"oh, come off it!" said edmund, who was tired and pretending not to be  tired, which always made him bad-tempered. "dont go on talking like that.”
"like what?" said susan; "and anyway, its time you were in bed.”
"trying to talk like mother," said edmund. "and who are you to say when im  to go to bed? go to bed yourself.”
"hadnt we all better go to bed?" said lucy. "theres sure to be a row if  were heard talking here.”
"no there wont," said peter. "i tell you this is the sort of house where  no ones going to mind what we do. anyway, they wont hear us. its about ten minutes walk  from here down to that dining-room, and any amount of stairs and passages in  between.”
"whats that noise?" said lucy suddenly. it was a far larger house than she  had ever been in before and the thought of all those long passages and rows of doors  leading into empty rooms was beginning to make her feel a little creepy.
"its only a bird, silly," said edmund.
"its an owl," said peter. "this is going to be a wonderful place for  birds. i shall go to bed now. i say, lets go and explore tomorrow. you might find anything in a  place like this.
did you see those mountains as we came along? and the woods? there might be  eagles.
there might be stags. therell be hawks.”
"badgers!" said lucy.   "foxes!" said edmund.   "rabbits!" said susan.   but when next morning came there was a steady rain falling, so thick that  when you looked out of the window you could see neither the mountains nor the woods  nor even the stream in the garden.
"of course it would be raining!" said edmund. they had just finished their  breakfast with the professor and were upstairs in the room he had set apart for them - a  long, low room with two windows looking out in one direction and two in another.
"do stop grumbling, ed," said susan. "ten to one itll clear up in an hour  or so. and in the meantime were pretty well off. theres a wireless and lots of books.”
"not for me"said peter; "im going to explore in  the house.”
everyone agreed to this and that was how the adventures began. it was the  sort of house that you never seem to come to the end of, and it was full of unexpected  places. the first few doors they tried led only into spare bedrooms, as everyone had expected  that they would; but soon they came to a very long room full of pictures and there  they found a suit of armour; and after that was a room all hung with green, with a harp in  one corner; and then came three steps down and five steps up, and then a kind of little  upstairs hall and a door that led out on to a balcony, and then a whole series of rooms that  led into each other and were lined with books - most of them very old books and some  bigger than a bible in a church. and shortly after that they looked into a room that was  quite empty except for one big wardrobe; the sort that has a looking-glass in the door.  there was nothing else in the room at all except a dead blue-bottle on the window- sill.   "nothing there!" said peter, and they all trooped out again - all except  lucy. she stayed behind because she thought it would be worth while trying the door of the  wardrobe, even though she felt almost sure that it would be locked. to her surprise it  opened quite easily, and two moth-balls dropped out.
looking into the inside, she saw several coats hanging up - mostly long fur  coats. there was nothing lucy liked so much as the smell and feel of fur. she  immediately stepped into the wardrobe and got in among the coats and rubbed her face against  them, leaving the door open, of course, because she knew that it is very foolish to shut  oneself into any wardrobe. soon she went further in and found that there was a second row of  coats hanging up behind the first one. it was almost quite dark in there and she  kept her arms stretched out in front of her so as not to bump her face into the back of  the wardrobe. she took a step further in - then two or three steps always expecting to feel  woodwork against the tips of her fingers. but she could not feel it.
"this must be a simply enormous wardrobe!" thought lucy, going still  further in and pushing the soft folds of the coats aside to make room for her. then she  noticed that there was something crunching under her feet. "i wonder is that more mothballs?"  she thought, stooping down to feel it with her hand. but instead of feeling the hard,  smooth wood of the floor of the wardrobe, she felt something soft and powdery and  extremely cold. "this is very queer," she said, and went on a step or two further.
next moment she found that what was rubbing against her face and hands was  no longer soft fur but something hard and rough and even prickly. "why, it is just  like branches of trees!" exclaimed lucy. and then she saw that there was a light ahead of  her; not a few inches away where the back of the wardrobe ought to have been, but a long  way off.
something cold and soft was falling on her. a moment later she found that  she was standing in the middle of a wood at night-time with snow under her feet and  snowflakes falling through the air.
lucy felt a little frightened, but she felt very inquisitive and excited as  well. she looked back over her shoulder and there, between the dark tree trunks; she could  still see the open doorway of the wardrobe and even catch a glimpse of the empty room  from which she had set out. (she had, of course, left the door open, for she knew that  it is a very silly thing to shut oneself into a wardrobe.) it seemed to be still daylight  there. "i can always get back if anything goes wrong," thought lucy. she began to walk forward,  crunch-crunch over the snow and through the wood towards the other light. in about  ten minutes she reached it and found it was a lamp-post. as she stood looking at it,  wondering why there was a lamp-post in the middle of a wood and wondering what to do  next, she heard a pitter patter of feet coming towards her. and soon after that a very  strange person stepped out from among the trees into the light of the lamp-post.
he was only a little taller than lucy herself and he carried over his head  an umbrella, white with snow. from the waist upwards he was like a man, but his legs  were shaped like a goats (the hair on them was glossy black) and instead of feet he  had goats hoofs.
he also had a tail, but lucy did not notice this at first because it was  neatly caught up over the arm that held the umbrella so as to keep it from trailing in the  snow. he had a red woollen muffler round his neck and his skin was rather reddish too. he  had a strange, but pleasant little face, with a short pointed beard and curly hair, and  out of the hair there stuck two horns, one on each side of his forehead. one of his hands, as i  have said, held  
the umbrella: in the other arm he carried several brown-paper parcels. what  with the parcels and the snow it looked just as if he had been doing his christmas  shopping. he was a faun. and when he saw lucy he gave such a start of surprise that he  dropped all his parcels.
"goodness gracious me!" exclaimed the faun.

 www.7wenxue.com



CHAPTER TWO

　ｗｗｗ．lzuo wen．ｃｏｍ
what lucy found there  "good evening," said lucy. but the faun was so busy picking up its parcels  that at first it did not reply. when it had finished it made her a little bow.
"good evening, good evening," said the faun. "excuse me - i dont want to  be inquisitive - but should i be right in thinking that you are a daughter of eve?”
"my names lucy," said she, not quite understanding him.
"but you are - forgive me - you are what they call a girl?" said the faun.
"of course im a girl," said lucy.
"you are in fact human?”
"of course im human," said lucy, still a little puzzled.
"to be sure, to be sure," said the faun. "how stupid of me! but ive never  seen a son of adam or a daughter of eve before. i am delighted. that is to say -" and  then it stopped as if it had been going to say something it had not intended but had  remembered in time.
"delighted, delighted," it went on. "allow me to introduce myself. my name  is tumnus.”
"i am very pleased to meet you, mr tumnus," said lucy.
"and may i ask, o lucy daughter of eve," said mr tumnus, "how you have come  into narnia?”
"narnia? whats that?" said lucy.
"this is the land of narnia," said the faun, "where we are now; all that  lies between the lamp-post and the great castle of cair paravel on the eastern sea. and you  - you have come from the wild woods of the west?”
"i - i got in through the wardrobe in the spare room," said lucy.
"ah!" said mr tumnus in a rather melancholy voice, "if only i had worked  harder at geography when i was a little faun, i should no doubt know all about those  strange countries. it is too late now.”
"but they arent countries at all," said lucy, almost laughing. "its only  just back there - at least - im not sure. it is summer there.”
"meanwhile," said mr tumnus, "it is winter in narnia, and has been for ever  so long, and we shall both catch cold if we stand here talking in the snow. daughter of  eve from the far land of spare oom where eternal summer reigns around the bright city of  war drobe, how would it be if you came and had tea with me?”
"thank you very much, mr tumnus," said lucy. "but i was wondering whether i  ought to be getting back.”
"its only just round the corner," said the faun, "and therell be a  roaring fire - and toast - and sardines - and cake.”
"well, its very kind of you," said lucy. "but i shant be able to stay  long.”
"if you will take my arm, daughter of eve," said mr tumnus, "i shall be  able to hold the umbrella over both of us. thats the way. now - off we go.”
and so lucy found herself walking through the wood arm in arm with this  strange creature as if they had known one another all their lives.
they had not gone far before they came to a place where the ground became  rough and there were rocks all about and little hills up and little hills down. at  the bottom of one small valley mr tumnus turned suddenly aside as if he were going to walk  straight into an unusually large rock, but at the last moment lucy found he was leading  her into the entrance of a cave. as soon as they were inside she found herself blinking  in the light of a wood fire. then mr tumnus stooped and took a flaming piece of wood out of  the fire with a neat little pair of tongs, and lit a lamp. "now we shant be long,"  he said, and immediately put a kettle on.
lucy thought she had never been in a nicer place. it was a little, dry,  clean cave of reddish stone with a carpet on the floor and two little chairs ("one for me  and one for a friend," said mr tumnus) and a table and a dresser and a mantelpiece over  the fire and above that a picture of an old faun with a grey beard. in one corner there  was a door which lucy thought must lead to mr tumnuss bedroom, and on one wall was a  shelf full of books. lucy looked at these while he was setting out the tea things.  they had titles like the life and letters of silenus or nymphs and their ways or men, monks and gamekeepers; a study in popular legend or is man a myth?
"now, daughter of eve!" said the faun.
and really it was a wonderful tea. there was a nice brown egg, lightly  boiled, for each of them, and then sardines on toast, and then buttered toast, and then toast  with honey, and then a sugar-topped cake. and when lucy was tired of eating the faun began  to talk. he had wonderful tales to tell of life in the forest. he told about the  midnight dances and how the nymphs who lived in the wells and the dryads who lived in the trees  came out to dance with the fauns; about long hunting parties after the milk-white stag  who could give you wishes if you caught him; about feasting and treasure-seeking with the  wild red dwarfs in deep mines and caverns far beneath the forest floor; and then  about summer when the woods were green and old silenus on his fat donkey would come to  visit them, and sometimes bacchus himself, and then the streams would run with wine  instead of water and the whole forest would give itself up to jollification for weeks  on end. "not that it isnt always winter now," he added gloomily. then to cheer himself  up he took out from its case on the dresser a strange little flute that looked as if it  were made of straw and began to play. and the tune he played made lucy want to cry and laugh  and dance and go to sleep all at the same time. it must have been hours later when  she shook herself and said:  "oh, mr tumnus - im so sorry to stop you, and i do love that tune - but  really, i must go home. i only meant to stay for a few minutes.”
"its no good now, you know," said the faun, laying down its flute and  shaking its head at her very sorrowfully.
"no good?" said lucy, jumping up and feeling rather frightened. "what do  you mean?
ive got to go home at once. the others will be wondering what has happened  to me." but a moment later she asked, "mr tumnus! whatever is the matter?" for the  fauns brown eyes had filled with tears and then the tears began trickling down its  cheeks, and soon they were running off the end of its nose; and at last it covered its face  with its hands and began to howl.
"mr tumnus! mr tumnus!" said lucy in great distress. "dont! dont! what is  the matter? aren you well? dear mr tumnus, do tell me what is wrong." but the  faun continued sobbing as if its heart would break. and even when lucy went over  and put her arms round him and lent him her hand kerchief, he did not stop. he  merely took the handker chief and kept on using it, wringing it out with both hands  whenever it got too wet to be any more use, so that presently lucy was standing in a damp  patch.
"mr tumnus!" bawled lucy in his ear, shaking him. "do stop. stop it at  once! you ought to be ashamed of yourself, a great big faun like you. what on earth are you  crying about?”
"oh - oh - oh!" sobbed mr tumnus, "im crying because im such a bad faun.”
"i dont think youre a bad faun at all," said lucy. "i think you are a  very good faun. you are the nicest faun ive ever met.”
"oh - oh - you wouldnt say that if you knew," replied mr tumnus between  his sobs. "no, im a bad faun. i dont suppose there ever was a worse faun since the  beginning of the world.”
"but what have you done?" asked lucy.
"my old father, now," said mr tumnus; "thats his picture over the  mantelpiece. he would never have done a thing like this.”
"a thing like what?" said lucy.
"like what ive done," said the faun. "taken service under the white witch.  thats what i am. im in the pay of the white witch.”
"the white witch? who is she?”
"why, it is she that has got all narnia under her thumb. its she that  makes it always winter. always winter and never christmas; think of that!”
"how awful!" said lucy. "but what does she pay you for?”
"thats the worst of it," said mr tumnus with a deep groan. "im a  kidnapper for her, thats what i am. look at me, daughter of eve. would you believe that im  the sort of faun to meet a poor innocent child in the wood, one that had never done me  any harm, and pretend to be friendly with it, and invite it home to my cave, all for  the sake of lulling it asleep and then handing it over to the white witch?”
"no," said lucy. "im sure you wouldnt do anything of the sort.”
"but i have," said the faun.
"well," said lucy rather slowly (for she wanted to be truthful and yet not  be too hard on him), "well, that was pretty bad. but youre so sorry for it that im sure  you will never do it again.”
"daughter of eve, dont you understand?" said the faun. "it isnt something  i have done.
im doing it now, this very moment.”
"what do you mean?" cried lucy, turning very white.
"you are the child," said tumnus. "i had orders from the white witch that  if ever i saw a son of adam or a daughter of eve in the wood, i was to catch them and hand  them over to her. and you are the first ive ever met. and ive pretended to be your  friend an asked you to tea, and all the time ive been meaning to wait till you were asleep  and then go and tell her.”
"oh, but you wont, mr tumnus," said lucy. "yo wont, will you? indeed,  indeed you really mustnt.”
"and if i dont," said he, beginning to cry again "shes sure to find out.  and shell have my tail cut off and my horns sawn off, and my beard plucked out, and shell  wave her wand over my beautiful clove hoofs and turn them into horrid solid hoofs  like wretched horses. and if she is extra and specially angry shell turn me into stone  and i shall be only statue of a faun in her horrible house until the four thrones at cair  paravel are filled and goodness knows when that will happen, or whether it will ever happen at  all.”
"im very sorry, mr tumnus," said lucy. "but please let me go home.”
"of course i will," said the faun. "of course ive got to. i see that now.  i hadnt known what humans were like before i met you. of course i cant give you up to  the witch; not now that i know you. but we must be off at once. ill see you back to the  lamp-post. i suppose you can find your own way from there back to spare oom and war  drobe?”
"im sure i can," said lucy.
"we must go as quietly as we can," said mr tumnus. "the whole wood is full  of her spies. even some of the trees are on her side.”
they both got up and left the tea things on the table, and mr tumnus once  more put up his umbrella and gave lucy his arm, and they went out into the snow. the  journey back was not at all like the journey to the fauns cave; they stole along as  quickly as they could, without speaking a word, and mr tumnus kept to the darkest places.  lucy was relieved when they reached the lamp-post again.
"do you know your way from here, daughter o eve?" said tumnus.
lucy looked very hard between the trees and could just see in the distance  a patch of light that looked like daylight. "yes," she said, "i can see the wardrobe door.”
"then be off home as quick as you can," said the faun, "and - c-can you  ever forgive me for what meant to do?”
"why, of course i can," said lucy, shaking him heartily by the hand. "and i  do hope you wont get into dreadful trouble on my account.”
"farewell, daughter of eve," said he. "perhaps i may keep the  handkerchief?”
"rather!" said lucy, and then ran towards the far off patch of daylight as  quickly as her legs would carry her. and presently instead of rough branch brushing past  her she felt coats, and instead of crunching snow under her feet she felt wooden board  and all at once she found herself jumping out of the wardrobe into the same empty room from  which the  
whole adventure had started. she shut the wardrobe door tightly behind her  and looked around, panting for breath. it was still raining and she could hear the  voices of the others in the passage.
"im here," she shouted. "im here. ive come back im all right.”

 www.xiabook.com



CHAPTER THREE

www.xiaboＯk.com
edmund and the wardrobe  lucy ran out of the empty room into the passage and found the other three.
"its all right," she repeated, "ive comeback.”
"what on earth are you talking about, lucy?" asked susan.
"why? said lucy in amazement, "havent you all been wondering where i was?”
"so youve been hiding, have you?" said peter. "poor old lu, hiding and  nobody noticed!
youll have to hide longer than that if you want people to start looking  for you.”
"but ive been away for hours and hours," said lucy.
the others all stared at one another.
"batty!" said edmund, tapping his head. "quite batty.”
"what do you mean, lu?" asked peter.
"what i said," answered lucy. "it was just after breakfast when i went into  the wardrobe, and ive been away for hours and hours, and had tea, and all sorts of  things have happened.”
"dont be silly, lucy," said susan. "weve only just come out of that room  a moment ago, and you were there then.”
"shes not being silly at all," said peter, "shes just making up a story  for fun, arent you, lu? and why shouldnt she?”
"no, peter, im not," she said. "its - its a magic wardrobe. theres a  wood inside it, and its snowing, and theres a faun and a witch and its called narnia; come  and see.”
the others did not know what to think, but lucy was so excited that they  all went back with her into the room. she rushed ahead of them, flung open the door of  the wardrobe and cried, "now! go in and see for yourselves.”
"why, you goose," said susan, putting her head inside and pulling the fur  coats apart, "its just an ordinary wardrobe; look! theres the back of it.”
then everyone looked in and pulled the coats apart; and they all saw - lucy  herself saw - a perfectly ordinary wardrobe. there was no wood and no snow, only the back  of the wardrobe, with hooks on it. peter went in and rapped his knuckles on it to  make sure that it was solid.
"a jolly good hoax, lu," he said as he came out again; "you have really  taken us in, i must admit. we half believed you.”
"but it wasnt a hoax at all," said lucy, "really and truly. it was all  different a moment ago. honestly it was. i promise.”
"come, lu," said peter, "thats going a bit far. youve had your joke.  hadnt you better drop it now?”
lucy grew very red in the face and tried to say something, though she  hardly knew what she was trying to say, and burst into tears.
for the next few days she was very miserable. she could have made it up  with the others quite easily at any moment if she could have brought herself to say that  the whole thing was only a story made up for fun. but lucy was a very truthful girl and she  knew that she was really in the right; and she could not bring herself to say this. the  others who thought she was telling a lie, and a silly lie too, made her very unhappy. the two  elder ones did this without meaning to do it, but edmund could be spiteful, and on this  occasion he was spiteful. he sneered and jeered at lucy and kept on asking her if shed  found any other new countries in other cupboards all over the house. what made it worse was  that these days ought to have been delightful. the weather was fine and they were out  of doors from morning to night, bathing, fishing, climbing trees, and lying in the  heather. but lucy could not properly enjoy any of it. and so things went on until the  next wet day.
that day, when it came to the afternoon and there was still no sign of a  break in the weather, they decided to play hide-and-seek. susan was "it" and as soon as  the others scattered to hide, lucy went to the room where the wardrobe was. she did  not mean to hide in the wardrobe, because she knew that would only set the others  talking again about the whole wretched business. but she did want to have one more look inside  it; for by this time she was beginning to wonder herself whether narnia and the faun had  not been a dream. the house was so large and complicated and full of hiding-places  that she thought she would have time to have one look into the wardrobe and then hide  somewhere else.
but as soon as she reached it she heard steps in the passage outside, and  then there was nothing for it but to jump into the wardrobe and hold the door closed  behind her. she did  
not shut it properly because she knew that it is very silly to shut oneself  into a wardrobe, even if it is not a magic one.
now the steps she had heard were those of edmund; and he came into the room  just in time to see lucy vanishing into the wardrobe. he at once decided to get  into it himself - not because he thought it a particularly good place to hide but because he  wanted to go on teasing her about her imaginary country. he opened the door. there were the  coats hanging up as usual, and a smell of mothballs, and darkness and silence,  and no sign of lucy. "she thinks im susan come to catch her," said edmund to himself,  "and so shes keeping very quiet in at the back." he jumped in and shut the door,  forgetting what a very foolish thing this is to do. then he began feeling about for lucy in the  dark. he had expected to find her in a few seconds and was very surprised when he did  not. he decided to open the door again and let in some light. but he could not find the  door either. he didnt like this at all and began groping wildly in every direction; he  even shouted out, "lucy! lu! where are you? i know youre here.”
there was no answer and edmund noticed that his own voice had a curious  sound - not the sound you expect in a cupboard, but a kind of open-air sound. he also  noticed that he was unexpectedly cold; and then he saw a light.
"thank goodness," said edmund, "the door must have swung open of its own  accord." he forgot all about lucy and went towards the light, which he thought was the  open door of the wardrobe. but instead of finding himself stepping out into the spare  room he found himself stepping out from the shadow of some thick dark fir trees into an  open place in the middle of a wood.
there was crisp, dry snow under his feet and more snow lying on the  branches of the trees. overhead there was pale blue sky, the sort of sky one sees on a fine  winter day in the morning. straight ahead of him he saw between the tree-trunks the sun,  just rising, very red and clear. everything was perfectly still, as if he were the only  living creature in that country. there was not even a robin or a squirrel among the trees, and  the wood stretched as far as he could see in every direction. he shivered.
he now remembered that he had been looking for lucy; and also how  unpleasant he had been to her about her "imaginary country" which now turned out not to have  been imaginary at all. he thought that she must be somewhere quite close and so  he shouted, "lucy! lucy! im here too-edmund.”
there was no answer.
"shes angry about all the things ive been saying lately," thought edmund.  and though he did not like to admit that he had been wrong, he also did not much like  being alone in this strange, cold, quiet place; so he shouted again.
"i say, lu! im sorry i didnt believe you. i see now you were right all  along. do come out. make it pax.”
still there was no answer.
"just like a girl," said edmund to himself, "sulking somewhere, and wont  accept an apology." he looked round him again and decided he did not much like this  place, and had almost made up his mind to go home, when he heard, very far off in the  wood, a sound of bells. he listened and the sound came nearer and nearer and at  last there swept into sight a sledge drawn by two reindeer.
the reindeer were about the size of shetland ponies and their hair was so  white that even the snow hardly looked white compared with them; their branching horns were  gilded and shone like something on fire when the sunrise caught them. their  harness was of scarlet leather and covered with bells. on the sledge, driving the  reindeer, sat a fat dwarf who would have been about three feet high if he had been standing. he was  dressed in polar bears fur and on his head he wore a red hood with a long gold tassel  hanging down from its point; his huge beard covered his knees and served him instead of  a rug. but behind him, on a much higher seat in the middle of the sledge sat a very  different person - a great lady, taller than any woman that edmund had ever seen. she also was  covered in white fur up to her throat and held a long straight golden wand in her  right hand and wore a golden crown on her head. her face was white - not merely pale, but white  like snow or paper or icing-sugar, except for her very red mouth. it was a beautiful  face in other respects, but proud and cold and stern.
the sledge was a fine sight as it came sweeping towards edmund with the  bells jingling and the dwarf cracking his whip and the snow flying up on each side of it.
"stop!" said the lady, and the dwarf pulled the reindeer up so sharp that  they almost sat down. then they recovered themselves and stood champing their bits and  blowing. in the frosty air the breath coming out of their nostrils looked like smoke.
"and what, pray, are you?" said the lady, looking hard at edmund.
"im-im-my names edmund," said edmund rather awkwardly. he did not like  the way she looked at him.
the lady frowned, "is that how you address a queen?" she asked, looking  sterner than ever.
"i beg your pardon, your majesty, i didnt know," said edmund:  "not know the queen of narnia?" cried she. "ha! you shall know us better  hereafter. but i repeat-what are you?”
"please, your majesty," said edmund, "i dont know what you mean. im at  school - at least i was its the holidays now.”

wＷw。xiabｏok.com



CHAPTER FOUR

。小%说^t*xt-天.堂
turkish delight  "but what are you?" said the queen again. "are you a great overgrown dwarf  that has cut off its beard?”
"no, your majesty," said edmund, "i never had a beard, im a boy.”
"a boy!" said she. "do you mean you are a son of adam?”
edmund stood still, saying nothing. he was too confused by this time to  understand what the question meant.
"i see you are an idiot, whatever else you may be," said the queen. "answer  me, once and for all, or i shall lose my patience. are you human?”
"yes, your majesty," said edmund.
"and how, pray, did you come to enter my dominions?”
"please, your majesty, i came in through a wardrobe.”
"a wardrobe? what do you mean?”
"i - i opened a door and just found myself here, your majesty," said  edmund.
"ha!" said the queen, speaking more to herself than to him. "a door. a door  from the world of men! i have heard of such things. this may wreck all. but he is  only one, and he is easily dealt with." as she spoke these words she rose from her seat and  looked edmund full in the face, her eyes flaming; at the same moment she raised her wand.  edmund felt sure that she was going to do something dreadful but he seemed unable to  move. then, just as he gave himself up for lost, she appeared to change her mind.
"my poor child," she said in quite a different voice, "how cold you look!  come and sit with me here on the sledge and i will put my mantle round you and we will  talk.”
edmund did not like this arrangement at all but he dared not disobey; he  stepped on to the sledge and sat at her feet, and she put a fold of her fur mantle round him  and tucked it well in.
"perhaps something hot to drink?" said the queen. "should you like that?”
"yes please, your majesty," said edmund, whose teeth were chattering.
the queen took from somewhere among her wrappings a very small bottle which  looked as if it were made of copper. then, holding out her arm, she let one drop  fall from it on the snow beside the sledge. edmund saw the drop for a second in mid-air,  shining like a diamond. but the moment it touched the snow there was a hissing sound and  there stood a jewelled cup full of something that steamed. the dwarf immediately took  this and handed it to edmund with a bow and a smile; not a very nice smile. edmund  felt much better as he began to sip the hot drink. it was something he had never  tasted before, very sweet and foamy and creamy, and it warmed him right down to his toes.
"it is dull, son of adam, to drink without eating," said the queen  presently. "what would you like best to eat?”
"turkish delight, please, your majesty," said edmund.
the queen let another drop fall from her bottle on to the snow, and  instantly there appeared a round box, tied with green silk ribbon, which, when opened,  turned out to contain several pounds of the best turkish delight. each piece was sweet  and light to the very centre and edmund had never tasted anything more delicious. he was  quite warm now, and very comfortable.
while he was eating the queen kept asking him questions. at first edmund  tried to remember that it is rude to speak with ones mouth full, but soon he forgot  about this and thought only of trying to shovel down as much turkish delight as he could,  and the more he ate the more he wanted to eat, and he never asked himself why the queen  should be so inquisitive. she got him to tell her that he had one brother and two  sisters, and that one of his sisters had already been in narnia and had met a faun there, and that  no one except himself and his brother and his sisters knew anything about narnia. she  seemed especially interested in the fact that there were four of them, and kept on  coming back to it. "you are sure there are just four of you?" she asked. "two sons of adam  and two daughters of eve, neither more nor less?" and edmund, with his mouth full  of turkish delight, kept on saying, "yes, i told you that before," and forgetting to  call her "your majesty", but she didnt seem to mind now.
at last the turkish delight was all finished and edmund was looking very  hard at the empty box and wishing that she would ask him whether he would like some  more.
probably the queen knew quite well what he was thinking; for she knew,  though edmund did not, that this was enchanted turkish delight and that anyone who had  once tasted it would want more and more of it, and would even, if they were allowed, go on  eating it till they killed themselves. but she did not offer him any more. instead,  she said to him,  "son of adam, i should so much like to see your brother and your two  sisters. will you bring them to see me?”
"ill try," said edmund, still looking at the empty box.
"because, if you did come again - bringing them with you of course - id be  able to give you some more turkish delight. i cant do it now, the magic will only work  once. in my own house it would be another matter.”
"why cant we go to your house now?" said edmund. when he had first got on  to the sledge he had been afraid that she might drive away with him to some  unknown place from which he would not be able to get back; but he had forgotten about  that fear now.
"it is a lovely place, my house," said the queen. "i am sure you would like  it. there are whole rooms full of turkish delight, and whats more, i have no children of  my own. i want a nice boy whom i could bring up as a prince and who would be king of  narnia when i am gone. while he was prince he would wear a gold crown and eat  turkish delight all day long; and you are much the cleverest and handsomest young  man ive ever met. i think i would like to make you the prince - some day, when you bring  the others to visit me.”
"why not now?" said edmund. his face had become very red and his mouth and  fingers were sticky. he did not look either clever or handsome, whatever the queen  might say.
"oh, but if i took you there now," said she, "i shouldnt see your brother  and your sisters.
i very much want to know your charming relations. you are to be the prince  and - later on - the king; that is understood. but you must have courtiers and nobles.  i will make your brother a duke and your sisters duchesses.”
"theres nothing special about them," said edmund, "and, anyway, i could  always bring them some other time.”
"ah, but once you were in my house," said the queen, "you might forget all  about thern.
you would be enjoying yourself so much that you wouldnt want the bother of  going to fetch them. no. you must go back to your own country now and come to me  another day, with them, you understand. it is no good coming without them.”
"but i dont even know the way back to my own country," pleaded edmund.  "thats easy," answered the queen. "do you see that lamp?" she pointed with her  wand and edmund turned and saw the same lamp-post under which lucy had met the faun.
"straight on, beyond that, is the way to the world of men. and now look the  other way- here she pointed in the opposite direction - "and tell me if you can see  two little hills rising above the trees.”
"i think i can," said edmund.
"well, my house is between those two hills. so next time you come you have  only to find the lamp-post and look for those two hills and walk through the wood till  you reach my house. but remember - you must bring the others with you. i might have to  be very angry with you if you came alone.”
"ill do my best," said edmund.
"and, by the way," said the queen, "you neednt tell them about me. it  would be fun to keep it a secret between us two, wouldnt it? make it a surprise for them.  just bring them along to the two hills - a clever boy like you will easily think of some  excuse for doing that - and when you come to my house you could just say "lets see who  lives here" or something like that. i am sure that would be best. if your sister has met  one of the fauns, she may have heard strange stories about me - nasty stories that might make  her afraid to come to me. fauns will say anything, you know, and now -”
"please, please," said edmund suddenly, "please couldnt i have just one  piece of turkish delight to eat on the way home?”
"no, no," said the queen with a laugh, "you must wait till next time."  while she spoke, she signalled to the dwarf to drive on, but as the sledge swept away out of  sight, the queen waved to edmund, calling out, "next time! next time! dont forget.  come soon.”
edmund was still staring after the sledge when he heard someone calling his  own name, and looking round he saw lucy coming towards him from another part of the  wood.
"oh, edmund!" she cried. "so youve got in too! isnt it wonderful, and  now-”
"all right," said edmund, "i see you were right and it is a magic wardrobe  after all. ill say im sorry if you like. but where on earth have you been all this time?  ive been looking for you everywhere.”
"if id known you had got in id have waited for you," said lucy, who was  too happy and excited to notice how snappishly edmund spoke or how flushed and strange  his face was.
"ive been having lunch with dear mr tumnus, the faun, and hes very well  and the white witch has done nothing to him for letting me go, so he thinks she cant  have found out and perhaps everything is going to be all right after all.”
"the white witch?" said edmund; "whos she?”
"she is a perfectly terrible person," said lucy. "she calls herself the  queen of narnia though she has no right to be queen at all, and all the fauns and dryads  and naiads and dwarfs and animals - at least all the good ones - simply hate her. and she  can turn people into stone and do all kinds of horrible things. and she has made a  magic so that it is always winter in narnia - always winter, but it never gets to christmas.  and she drives about on a sledge, drawn by reindeer, with her wand in her hand and a crown  on her head.”
edmund was already feeling uncomfortable from having eaten too many sweets,  and when he heard that the lady he had made friends with was a dangerous witch  he felt even more uncomfortable. but he still wanted to taste that turkish delight again  more than he wanted anything else.
"who told you all that stuff about the white witch?" he asked.
"mr tumnus, the faun," said lucy.
"you cant always believe what fauns say," said edmund, trying to sound as  if he knew far more about them than lucy.
"who said so?" asked lucy.
"everyone knows it," said edmund; "ask anybody you like. but its pretty  poor sport standing here in the snow. lets go home.”
"yes, lets," said lucy. "oh, edmund, i am glad youve got in too. the  others will have to believe in narnia now that both of us have been there. what fun it will  be!”
but edmund secretly thought that it would not be as good fun for him as for  her. he would have to admit that lucy had been right, before all the others, and he  felt sure the others would all be on the side of the fauns and the animals; but he was  already more than half on the side of the witch. he did not know what he would say, or  how he would keep his secret once they were all talking about narnia.
by this time they had walked a good way. then suddenly they felt coats  around them instead of branches and next moment they were both standing outside the  wardrobe in the empty room.
"i say," said lucy, "you do look awful, edmund. dont you feel well?”
"im all right," said edmund, but this was not true. he was feeling very  sick.
"come on then," said lucy, "lets find the others. what a lot we shall have  to tell them!
and what wonderful adventures we shall have now that were all in it  together.”

www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ



CHAPTER FIVE

小,说,t，xt,天,堂
back on this side of the door  because the game of hide-and-seek was still going on, it took edmund and  lucy some time to find the others. but when at last they were all together (which  happened in the long room, where the suit of armour was) lucy burst out:  "peter! susan! its all true. edmund has seen it too. there is a country  you can get to through the wardrobe. edmund and i both got in. we met one another in  there, in the wood. go on, edmund; tell them all about it.”
"whats all this about, ed?" said peter.
and now we come to one of the nastiest things in this story. up to that  moment edmund had been feeling sick, and sulky, and annoyed with lucy for being right,  but he hadnt made up his mind what to do. when peter suddenly asked him the question he  decided all at once to do the meanest and most spiteful thing he could think of. he  decided to let lucy down.
"tell us, ed," said susan.
and edmund gave a very superior look as if he were far older than lucy  (there was really only a years difference) and then a little snigger and said, "oh, yes,  lucy and i have been playing - pretending that all her story about a country in the wardrobe is  true. just for fun, of course. theres nothing there really.”
poor lucy gave edmund one look and rushed out of the room.
edmund, who was becoming a nastier person every minute, thought that he had  scored a great success, and went on at once to say, "there she goes again. whats  the matter with her? thats the worst of young kids, they always -”
"look here," said peter, turning on him savagely, "shut up! youve been  perfectly beastly to lu ever since she started this nonsense about the wardrobe, and now you  go playing games with her about it and setting her off again. i believe you did it  simply out of spite.”
"but its all nonsense," said edmund, very taken aback.
"of course its all nonsense," said peter, "thats just the point. lu was  perfectly all right when we left home, but since weve been down here she seems to be either  going queer in the head or else turning into a most frightful liar. but whichever it is,  what good do you think youll do by jeering and nagging at her one day and encouraging her  the next?”
"i thought - i thought," said edmund; but he couldnt think of anything to  say.
"you didnt think anything at all," said peter; "its just spite. youve  always liked being beastly to anyone smaller than yourself; weve seen that at school before  now.”
"do stop it," said susan; "it wont make things any better having a row  between you two.
lets go and find lucy.”
it was not surprising that when they found lucy, a good deal later,  everyone could see that she had been crying. nothing they could say to her made any  difference. she stuck to her story and said:   
"i dont care what you think, and i dont care what you say. you can tell  the professor or you can write to mother or you can do anything you like. i know ive met a  faun in there and - i wish id stayed there and you are all beasts, beasts.”
it was an unpleasant evening. lucy was miserable and edmund was beginning  to feel that his plan wasnt working as well as he had expected. the two older ones were  really beginning to think that lucy was out of her mind. they stood in the passage  talking about it in whispers long after she had gone to bed.
the result was the next morning they decided that they really would go and  tell the whole thing to the professor. "hell write to father if he thinks there is really  something wrong with lu," said peter; "its getting beyond us." so they went and knocked at  the study door, and the professor said "come in," and got up and found chairs for  them and said he was quite at their disposal. then he sat listening to them with the tips of  his fingers pressed together and never interrupting, till they had finished the whole  story. after that he said nothing for quite a long time. then he cleared his throat and said  the last thing either of them expected:  "how do you know," he asked, "that your sisters story is not true?”
"oh, but -" began susan, and then stopped. anyone could see from the old  mans face that he was perfectly serious. then susan pulled herself together and said,  "but edmund said they had only been pretending.”
"that is a point," said the professor, "which certainly deserves  consideration; very careful consideration. for instance - if you will excuse me for asking the question  - does your experience lead you to regard your brother or your sister as the more  reliable? i mean, which is the more truthful?”
"thats just the funny thing about it, sir," said peter. "up till now, id  have said lucy every time.”
"and what do you think, my dear?" said the professor, turning to susan.
"well," said susan, "in general, id say the same as peter, but this  couldnt be true - all this about the wood and the faun.”
"that is more than i know," said the professor, "and a charge of lying  against someone whom you have always found truthful is a very serious thing; a very serious  thing indeed.”
"we were afraid it mightnt even be lying," said susan; "we thought there  might be something wrong with lucy.”
"madness, you mean?" said the professor quite coolly. "oh, you can make  your minds easy about that. one has only to look at her and talk to her to see that  she is not mad.”
"but then," said susan, and stopped. she had never dreamed that a grown-up  would talk like the professor and didnt know what to think.
"logic!" said the professor half to himself. "why dont they teach logic at  these schools?
there are only three possibilities. either your sister is telling lies, or  she is mad, or she is telling the truth. you know she doesnt tell lies and it is obvious that  she is not mad for the moment then and unless any further evidence turns up, we must assume  that she is telling the truth.”
susan looked at him very hard and was quite sure from the expression on his  face that he was no making fun of them.
"but how could it be true, sir?" said peter.
"why do you say that?" asked the professor.
"well, for one thing," said peter, "if it was true why doesnt everyone  find this country every time they go to the wardrobe? i mean, there was nothing there when we  looked; even lucy didnt pretend the was.”
"what has that to do with it?" said the professor.
"well, sir, if things are real, theyre there all the time.”
"are they?" said the professor; and peter didnt know quite what to say.
"but there was no time," said susan. "lucy had no time to have gone  anywhere, even if there was such a place. she came running after us the very moment we were  out of the room. it was less than minute, and she pretended to have been away for  hours.”
"that is the very thing that makes her story so likely to be true," said  the professor. "if there really a door in this house that leads to some other world (and i  should warn you that this is a very strange house, and even i know very little about it) -  if, i say, she had got into another world, i should not be at a surprised to find that the  other world had a separate time of its own; so that however long you stay there it would  never take up any of our time. on the other hand, i dont think many girls of her age would  invent that idea for themselves. if she had been pretending, she would have hidden for a  reasonable time before coming out and telling her story.”
"but do you really mean, sir," said peter, "that there could be other  worlds - all over the place, just round the corner - like that?”
"nothing is more probable," said the professor, taking off his spectacles  and beginning to polish them, while he muttered to himself, "i wonder what they do teach  them at these schools.”
"but what are we to do?" said susan. she felt that the conversation was  beginning to get off the point.
"my dear young lady," said the professor, suddenly looking up with a very  sharp expression at both of them, "there is one plan which no one has yet  suggested and which is well worth trying.”
"whats that?" said susan.
"we might all try minding our own business," said he. and that was the end  of that conversation.
after this things were a good deal better for lucy. peter saw to it that  edmund stopped jeering at her, and neither she nor anyone else felt inclined to talk about  the wardrobe at all. it had become a rather alarming subject. and so for a time it looked  as if all the adventures were coming to an end; but that was not to be.
this house of the professors - which even he knew so little about - was so  old and famous that people from all over england used to come and ask permission to  see over it.
it was the sort of house that is mentioned in guide books and even in  histories; and well it might be, for all manner of stories were told about it, some of them even  stranger than the one i am telling you now. and when parties of sightseers arrived and asked  to see the house, the professor always gave them permission, and mrs macready, the  housekeeper, showed them round, telling them about the pictures and the armour, and the  rare books in the library. mrs macready was not fond of children, and did not like to be  interrupted when she was telling visitors all the things she knew. she had said to  susan and peter almost on the first morning (along with a good many other instructions),  "and please remember youre to keep out of the way whenever im taking a party over the  house.”
"just as if any of us would want to waste half the morning trailing round  with a crowd of strange grown-ups!" said edmund, and the other three thought the same. that  was how the adventures began for the second time.
a few mornings later peter and edmund were looking at the suit of armour  and wondering if they could take it to bits when the two girls rushed into the  room and said, "look out! here comes the macready and a whole gang with her.”
"sharps the word," said peter, and all four made off through the door at  the far end of the room. but when they had got out into the green room and beyond it, into the  library, they suddenly heard voices ahead of them, and realized that mrs macready  must be bringing her party of sightseers up the back stairs - instead of up the  front stairs as they had expected. and after that - whether it was that they lost their heads,  or that mrs macready was trying to catch them, or that some magic in the house had come  to life and was chasing them into narnia they seemed to find themselves being followed everywhere, until at last susan said, "oh bother those trippers! here -  lets get into the  
wardrobe room till theyve passed. no one will follow us in there." but the  moment they were inside they heard the voices in the passage - and then someone  fumbling at the door - and then they saw the handle turning.
"quick!" said peter, "theres nowhere else," and flung open the wardrobe.  all four of them bundled inside it and sat there, panting, in the dark. peter held the  door closed but did not shut it; for, of course, he remembered, as every sensible person  does, that you should never never shut yourself up in a wardrobe.

 



CHAPTER SIX

wwＷ．xiabook.com
into the forest  "i wish the macready would hurry up and take all these people away," said  susan presently, "im getting horribly cramped.”
"and what a filthy smell of camphor!" said edmund.
"i expect the pockets of these coats are full of it," said susan, "to keep  away the moths.”
"theres something sticking into my back," said peter.
"and isnt it cold?" said susan.
"now that you mention it, it is cold," said peter, "and hang it all, its  wet too. whats the matter with this place? im sitting on something wet. its getting wetter  every minute." he struggled to his feet.
"lets get out," said edmund, "theyve gone.”
"o-o-oh!" said susan suddenly, and everyone asked her what was the matter.
"im sitting against a tree," said susan, "and look! its getting light -  over there.”
"by jove, youre right," said peter, "and look there - and there. its  trees all round. and this wet stuff is snow. why, i do believe weve got into lucys wood after  all.”
and now there was no mistaking it and all four children stood blinking in  the daylight of a winter day. behind them were coats hanging on pegs, in front of them were  snow-covered trees.
peter turned at once to lucy.
"i apologize for not believing you," he said, "im sorry. will you shake  hands?”
"of course," said lucy, and did.
"and now," said susan, "what do we do next?”
"do?" said peter, "why, go and explore the wood, of course.”
"ugh!" said susan, stamping her feet, "its pretty cold. what about putting  on some of these coats?”
"theyre not ours," said peter doubtfully.
"i am sure nobody would mind," said susan; "it isnt as if we wanted to  take them out of the house; we shant take them even out of the wardrobe.”
"i never thought of that, su," said peter. "of course, now you put it that  way, i see. no one could say you had bagged a coat as long as you leave it in the wardrobe  where you found it. and i suppose this whole country is in the wardrobe.”
they immediately carried out susans very sensible plan. the coats were  rather too big for them so that they came down to their heels and looked more like royal  robes than coats when they had put them on. but they all felt a good deal warmer and  each thought the others looked better in their new get-up and more suitable to the  landscape.
"we can pretend we are arctic explorers," said lucy.
"this is going to be exciting enough without pretending," said peter, as he  began leading the way forward into the forest. there were heavy darkish clouds overhead  and it looked as if there might be more snow before night.
"i say," began edmund presently, "oughtnt we to be bearing a bit more to  the left, that is, if we are aiming for the lamp-post?" he had forgotten for the moment that  he must pretend never to have been in the wood before. the moment the words were  out of his mouth he realized that he had given himself away. everyone stopped;  everyone stared at him. peter whistled.
"so you really were here," he said, "that time lu said shed met you in  here - and you made out she was telling lies.”
there was a dead silence. "well, of all the poisonous little beasts -" said  peter, and shrugged his shoulders and said no more. there seemed, indeed, no more to  say, and presently the four resumed their journey; but edmund was saying to himself,  "ill pay you all out for this, you pack of stuck-up, selfsatisfied prigs.”
"where are we going anyway?" said susan, chiefly for the sake of changing  the subject.
"i think lu ought to be the leader," said peter; "goodness knows she  deserves it. where will you take us, lu?”
"what about going to see mr tumnus?" said lucy. "hes the nice faun i told  you about.”
everyone agreed to this and off they went walking briskly and stamping  their feet. lucy proved a good leader. at first she wondered whether she would be able to  find the way, but she recognized an oddlooking tree on one place and a stump in another  and brought them on to where the ground became uneven and into the little valley and at  last to the very door of mr tumnuss cave. but there a terrible surprise awaited them.
the door had been wrenched off its hinges and broken to bits. inside, the  cave was dark and cold and had the damp feel and smell of a place that had not been lived  in for several days. snow had drifted in from the doorway and was heaped on the floor,  mixed with something black, which turned out to be the charred sticks and ashes from  the fire.
someone had apparently flung it about the room and then stamped it out. the  crockery lay smashed on the floor and the picture of the fauns father had been  slashed into shreds with a knife.
"this is a pretty good wash-out," said edmund; "not much good coming here.”
"what is this?" said peter, stooping down. he had just noticed a piece of  paper which had been nailed through the carpet to the floor.
"is there anything written on it?" asked susan.
"yes, i think there is," answered peter, "but i cant read it in this  light. lets get out into the open air.”
they all went out in the daylight and crowded round peter as he read out  the following words:  the former occupant of these premises, the faun tumnus, is under arrest and  awaiting his trial on a charge of high treason against her imperial majesty jadis,  queen of narnia, chatelaine of cair paravel, empress of the lone islands, etc., also  of comforting her said majestys enemies, harbouring spies and fraternizing with humans.
signed maugrim, captain of the secret police, long live the queen  the children stared at each other.
"i dont know that im going to like this place after all," said susan.
"who is this queen, lu?" said peter. "do you know anything about her?”
"she isnt a real queen at all," answered lucy; "shes a horrible witch,  the white witch.
everyone all the wood people - hate her. she has made an enchantment over  the whole country so that it is always winter here and never christmas.”
"i - i wonder if theres any point in going on," said susan. "i mean, it  doesnt seem particularly safe here and it looks as if it wont be much fun either. and  its getting colder every minute, and weve brought nothing to eat. what about just going  home?”
"oh, but we cant, we cant," said lucy suddenly; "dont you see? we cant  just go home, not after this. it is all on my account that the poor faun has got into  this trouble. he hid me from the witch and showed me the way back. thats what it means by  comforting the queens enemies and fraternizing with humans. we simply must try to rescue  him.”
"a lot we could do! said edmund, "when we havent even got anything to  eat!”
"shut up - you!" said peter, who was still very angry with edmund. "what do  you think, susan?”
"ive a horrid feeling that lu is right," said susan. "i dont want to go a  step further and i wish wed never come. but i think we must try to do something for mr  whatever-his-name is - i mean the faun.”
"thats what i feel too," said peter. "im worried about having no food  with us. id vote for going back and getting something from the larder, only there doesnt  seem to be any certainty of getting into this country again when once youve got out of  it. i think well have to go on.”
"so do i," said both the girls.
"if only we knew where the poor chap was imprisoned!" said peter.
they were all still wondering what to do next, when lucy said, "look!  theres a robin, with such a red breast. its the first bird ive seen here. i say! - i  wonder can birds talk in narnia? it almost looks as if it wanted to say something to us." then she  turned to the robin and said, "please, can you tell us where tumnus the faun has been  taken to?" as she said this she took a step towards the bird. it at once flew away but  only as far as to the next tree. there it perched and looked at them very hard as if it  understood all they had been saying. almost without noticing that they had done so, the four  children went a step or two nearer to it. at this the robin flew away again to the next tree and  once more looked at them very hard. (you couldnt have found a robin with a redder  chest or a brighter eye.)  "do you know," said lucy, "i really believe he means us to follow him.”
"ive an idea he does," said susan. "what do you think, peter?”
"well, we might as well try it," answered peter.
the robin appeared to understand the matter thoroughly. it kept going from  tree to tree, always a few yards ahead of them, but always so near that they could easily  follow it. in this way it led them on, slightly downhill. wherever the robin alighted a  little shower of snow would fall off the branch. presently the clouds parted overhead and  the winter sun came out and the snow all around them grew dazzlingly bright. they had been  travelling in this way for about half an hour, with the two girls in front, when  edmund said to peter, "if youre not still too high and mighty to talk to me, ive something to  say which youd better listen to.”
"what is it?" asked peter.
"hush! not so loud," said edmund; "theres no good frightening the girls.  but have you realized what were doing?”
"what?" said peter, lowering his voice to a whisper.
"were following a guide we know nothing about. how do we know which side  that bird is on? why shouldnt it be leading us into a trap?”
"thats a nasty idea. still - a robin, you know. theyre good birds in all  the stories ive ever read. im sure a robin wouldnt be on the wrong side.”
"it if comes to that, which is the right side? how do we know that the  fauns are in the right and the queen (yes, i know weve been told shes a witch) is in the  wrong? we dont really know anything about either.”
"the faun saved lucy.”
"he said he did. but how do we know? and theres another thing too. has  anyone the least idea of the way home from here?”
"great scott!" said peter, "i hadnt thought of that.”
"and no chance of dinner either," said edmund.

wＷw。xiabｏok.com



CHAPTER SEVEN

xiaoshuotxt
a day with the beavers   
while the two boys were whispering behind, both the girls suddenly cried  "oh!" and stopped.
"the robin!" cried lucy, "the robin. its flown away." and so it had -  right out of sight.
"and now what are we to do?" said edmund, giving peter a look which was as  much as to say "what did i tell you?”
"sh! look!" said susan.
"what?" said peter.
"theres something moving among the trees over there to the left.”
they all stared as hard as they could, and no one felt very comfortable.
"there it goes again," said susan presently.
"i saw it that time too," said peter. "its still there. its just gone  behind that big tree.”
"what is it?" asked lucy, trying very hard not to sound nervous.
"whatever it is," said peter, "its dodging us. its something that doesnt  want to be seen.”
"lets go home," said susan. and then, though nobody said it out loud,  everyone suddenly realized the same fact that edmund had whispered to peter at the  end of the last chapter. they were lost.
"whats it like?" said lucy.
"its - its a kind of animal," said susan; and then, "look! look! quick!  there it is.”
they all saw it this time, a whiskered furry face which had looked out at  them from behind a tree. but this time it didnt immediately draw back. instead, the  animal put its paw against its mouth just as humans put their finger on their lips when  they are signalling to you to be quiet. then it disappeared again. the children, all  stood holding their breath.
a moment later the stranger came out from behind the tree, glanced all  round as if it were afraid someone was watching, said "hush", made signs to them to join it in  the thicker bit of wood where it was standing, and then once more disappeared.
"i know what it is," said peter; "its a beaver. i saw the tail.”
"it wants us to go to it," said susan, "and it is warning us not to make a  noise.”
"i know," said peter. "the question is, are we to go to it or not? what do  you think, lu?”
"i think its a nice beaver," said lucy.
"yes, but how do we know?" said edmund.
"shant we have to risk it?" said susan. "i mean, its no good just  standing here and i feel i want some dinner.”
at this moment the beaver again popped its head out from behind the tree  and beckoned earnestly to them.
"come on," said peter,"lets give it a try. all keep close together. we  ought to be a match for one beaver if it turns out to be an enemy.”
so the children all got close together and walked up to the tree and in  behind it, and there, sure enough, they found the beaver; but it still drew back, saying to them  in a hoarse throaty whisper, "further in, come further in. right in here. were not  safe in the open!”
only when it had led them into a dark spot where four trees grew so close  together that their boughs met and the brown earth and pine needles could be seen  underfoot because no snow had been able to fall there, did it begin to talk to them.
"are you the sons of adam and the daughters of eve?" it said.
"were some of them," said peter.
"s-s-s-sh!" said the beaver, "not so loud please. were not safe even  here.”
"why, who are you afraid of?" said peter. "theres no one here but  ourselves.”
"there are the trees," said the beaver. "theyre always listening. most of  them are on our side, but there are trees that would betray us to her; you know who i  mean," and it nodded its head several times.
"if it comes to talking about sides," said edmund, "how do we know youre a  friend?”
"not meaning to be rude, mr beaver," added peter, "but you see, were  strangers.”
"quite right, quite right," said the beaver. "here is my token." with these  words it held up to them a little white object. they all looked at it in surprise, till  suddenly lucy said, "oh, of course. its my handkerchief - the one i gave to poor mr tumnus.”
"thats right," said the beaver. "poor fellow, he got wind of the arrest  before it actually happened and handed this over to me. he said that if anything happened to  him i must meet you here and take you on to -" here the beavers voice sank into  silence and it gave  
one or two very mysterious nods. then signalling to the children to stand  as close around it as they possibly could, so that their faces were actually tickled by its  whiskers, it added in a low whisper -  "they say aslan is on the move - perhaps has already landed.”
and now a very curious thing happened. none of the children knew who aslan  was any more than you do; but the moment the beaver had spoken these words everyone  felt quite different. perhaps it has sometimes happened to you in a dream that someone  says something which you dont understand but in the dream it feels as if it had  some enormous meaning - either a terrifying one which turns the whole dream into  a nightmare or else a lovely meaning too lovely to put into words, which makes the  dream so beautiful that you remember it all your life and are always wishing you  could get into that dream again. it was like that now. at the name of aslan each one of the  children felt something jump in its inside. edmund felt a sensation of mysterious horror.  peter felt suddenly brave and adventurous. susan felt as if some delicious smell or  some delightful strain of music had just floated by her. and lucy got the feeling you have  when you wake up in the morning and realize that it is the beginning of the holidays  or the beginning of summer.
"and what about mr tumnus," said lucy; "where is he?”
"s-s-s-sh," said the beaver, "not here. i must bring you where we can have  a real talk and also dinner.”
no one except edmund felt any difficulty about trusting the beaver now, and  everyone, including edmund, was very glad to hear the word "dinner".
they therefore all hurried along behind their new friend who led them at a  surprisingly quick pace, and always in the thickest parts of the forest, for over an  hour. everyone was feeling very tired and very hungry when suddenly the trees began to get  thinner in front of them and the ground to fall steeply downhill. a minute later they came  out under the open sky (the sun was still shining) and found themselves looking down on a  fine sight.
they were standing on the edge of a steep, narrow valley at the bottom of  which ran - at least it would have been running if it hadnt been frozen - a fairly large  river. just below them a dam had been built across this river, and when they saw it everyone  suddenly remembered that of course beavers are always making dams and felt quite  sure that mr beaver had made this one. they also noticed that he now had a sort of  modest expression on his, face - the sort of look people have when you are visiting a garden  theyve made or reading a story theyve written. so it was only common politeness when  susan said, "what a lovely dam!" and mr beaver didnt say "hush" this time but "merely  a trifle!
merely a trifle! and it isnt really finished!”
above the dam there was what ought to have been a deep pool but was now, of  course, a level floor of dark green ice. and below the dam, much lower down, was more  ice, but  
instead of being smooth this was all frozen into the foamy and wavy shapes  in which the water had been rushing along at the very moment when the frost came. and  where the water had been trickling over and spurting through the dam there was now a  glittering wall of icicles, as if the side of the dam had been covered all over with  flowers and wreaths and festoons of the purest sugar. and out in the middle, and partly  on top of the dam was a funny little house shaped rather like an enormous beehive and  from a hole in the roof smoke was going up, so that when you saw it {especially if you  were hungry) you at once thought of cooking and became hungrier than you were before.
that was what the others chiefly noticed, but edmund noticed something  else. a little lower down the river there was another small river which came down another  small valley to join it. and looking up that valley, edmund could see two small  hills, and he was almost sure they were the two hills which the white witch had pointed  out to him when he parted from her at the lamp-post that other day. and then between  them, he thought, must be her palace, only a mile off or less. and he thought about  turkish delight and about being a king ("and i wonder how peter will like that?" he  asked himself) and horrible ideas came into his head.
"here we are," said mr beaver, "and it looks as if mrs beaver is expecting  us. ill lead the way. but be careful and dont slip.”
the top of the dam was wide enough to walk on, though not (for humans) a  very nice place to walk because it was covered with ice, and though the frozen pool  was level with it on one side, there was a nasty drop to the lower river on the other.  along this route mr beaver led them in single file right out to the middle where they could  look a long way up the river and a long way down it. and when they had reached the middle  they were at the door of the house.
"here we are, mrs beaver," said mr beaver, "ive found them. here are the  sons and daughters of adam and eve- and they all went in.
the first thing lucy noticed as she went in was a burring sound, and the  first thing she saw was a kindlooking old she-beaver sitting in the corner with a thread in  her mouth working busily at her sewing machine, and it was from it that the sound  came. she stopped her work and got up as soon as the children came in.
"so youve come at last!" she said, holding out both her wrinkled old paws.  "at last! to think that ever i should live to see this day! the potatoes are on boiling  and the kettles singing and i daresay, mr beaver, youll get us some fish.”
"that i will," said mr beaver, and he went out of the house (peter went  with him), and across the ice of the deep pool to where he had a little hole in the ice  which he kept open every day with his hatchet. they took a pail with them. mr beaver sat down  quietly at the edge of the hole (he didnt seem to mind it being so chilly), looked hard  into it, then suddenly shot in his paw, and before you could say jack robinson had  whisked out a beautiful trout. then he did it all over again until they had a fine catch  of fish.
meanwhile the girls were helping mrs beaver to fill the kettle and lay the  table and cut the bread and put the plates in the oven to heat and draw a huge jug of  beer for mr beaver from a barrel which stood in one corner of the house, and to put on the  frying-pan and get the dripping hot. lucy thought the beavers had a very snug little home  though it was not at all like mr tumnuss cave. there were no books or pictures, and instead  of beds there were bunks, like on board ship, built into the wall. and there were hams  and strings of onions hanging from the roof, and against the walls were gum boots and  oilskins and hatchets and pairs of shears and spades and trowels and things for carrying  mortar in and fishing-rods and fishing-nets and sacks. and the cloth on the table, though  very clean, was very rough.
just as the frying-pan was nicely hissing peter and mr beaver came in with  the fish which mr beaver had already opened with his knife and cleaned out in the  open air. you can think how good the new-caught fish smelled while they were frying and  how the hungry children longed for them to be done and how very much hungrier still  they had become before mr beaver said, "now were nearly ready." susan drained the  potatoes and then put them all back in the empty pot to dry on the side of the range  while lucy was helping mrs beaver to dish up the trout, so that in a very few minutes  everyone was drawing up their stools (it was all three-legged stools in the beavers  house except for mrs beavers own special rockingchair beside the fire) and preparing to  enjoy themselves. there was a jug of creamy milk for the children (mr beaver  stuck to beer) and a great big lump of deep yellow butter in the middle of the table from  which everyone took as much as he wanted to go with his potatoes, and all the  children thought - and i agree with them - that theres nothing to beat good freshwater fish  if you eat it when it has been alive half an hour ago and has come out of the pan half a  minute ago.
and when they had finished the fish mrs beaver brought unexpectedly out of  the oven a great and gloriously sticky marmalade roll, steaming hot, and at the same  time moved the kettle on to the fire, so that when they had finished the marmalade roll  the tea was made and ready to be poured out. and when each person had got his (or her) cup  of tea, each person shoved back his (or her) stool so as to be able to lean against the  wall and gave a long sigh of contentment.
"and now," said mr beaver, pushing away his empty beer mug and pulling his  cup of tea towards him, "if youll just wait till ive got my pipe lit up and going  nicely - why, now we can get to business. its snowing again," he added, cocking his eye at  the window.
"thats all the better, because it means we shant have any visitors; and  if anyone should have been trying to follow you, why he wont find any tracks.”

www、mdwenxue.com



CHAPTER EIGHT

www.lzuowen.com
what happened after dinner   
"and now," said lucy, "do please tell us whats happened to mr tumnus.”
"ah, thats bad," said mr beaver, shaking his head. "thats a very, very  bad business.
theres no doubt he was taken off by the police. i got that from a bird who  saw it done.”
"but wheres he been taken to?" asked lucy.
"well, they were heading northwards when they were last seen and we all  know what that means.”
"no, we dont," said susan. mr beaver shook his head in a very gloomy  fashion.
"im afraid it means they were taking him to her house," he said.
"but whatll they do to him, mr beaver?" gasped lucy.
"well," said mr beaver, "you cant exactly say for sure. but theres not  many taken in there that ever comes out again. statues. all full of statues they say it  is - in the courtyard and up the stairs and in the hall. people shes turned" - (he paused and  shuddered) "turned into stone.”
"but, mr beaver," said lucy, "cant we - i mean we must do something to  save him. its too dreadful and its all on my account.”
"i dont doubt youd save him if you could, dearie," said mrs beaver, "but  youve no chance of getting into that house against her will and ever coming out  alive.”
"couldnt we have some stratagem?" said peter. "i mean couldnt we dress up  as something, or pretend to be - oh, pedlars or anything - or watch till she  was gone out - or- oh, hang it all, there must be some way. this faun saved my sister at his  own risk, mr beaver. we cant just leave him to be - to be - to have that done to him.”
"its no good, son of adam," said mr beaver, "no good your trying, of all  people. but now that aslan is on the move-”
"oh, yes! tell us about aslan!" said several voices at once; for once again  that strange feeling - like the first signs of spring, like good news, had come over  them.
"who is aslan?" asked susan.
"aslan?" said mr beaver. "why, dont you know? hes the king. hes the lord  of the whole wood, but not often here, you understand. never in my time or my  fathers time.
but the word has reached us that he has come back. he is in narnia at this  moment. hell settle the white queen all right. it is he, not you, that will save mr  tumnus.”
"she wont turn him into stone too?" said edmund.
"lord love you, son of adam, what a simple thing to say!" answered mr  beaver with a great laugh. "turn him into stone? if she can stand on her two feet and  look him in the face itll be the most she can do and more than i expect of her. no, no.  hell put all to rights as it says in an old rhyme in these parts:  wrong will be right, when aslan comes in sight,  at the sound of his roar, sorrows will be no more,  when he bares his teeth, winter meets its death,  and when he shakes his mane, we shall have spring again.
youll understand when you see him.”
"but shall we see him?" asked susan.
"why, daughter of eve, thats what i brought you here for. im to lead you  where you shall meet him," said mr beaver.
"is-is he a man?" asked lucy.
"aslan a man!" said mr beaver sternly. "certainly not. i tell you he is the  king of the wood and the son of the great emperor-beyond-the-sea. dont you know who is  the king of beasts? aslan is a lion - the lion, the great lion.”
"ooh!" said susan, "id thought he was a man. is he - quite safe? i shall  feel rather nervous about meeting a lion.”
"that you will, dearie, and no mistake," said mrs beaver; "if theres  anyone who can appear before aslan without their knees knocking, theyre either braver  than most or else just silly.”
"then he isnt safe?" said lucy.
"safe?" said mr beaver; "dont you hear what mrs beaver tells you? who said  anything about safe? course he isnt safe. but hes good. hes the king, i tell  you.”
"im longing to see him," said peter, "even if i do feel frightened when it  comes to the point.”
"thats right, son of adam," said mr beaver, bringing his paw down on the  table with a crash that made all the cups and saucers rattle. "and so you shall. word  has been sent that you are to meet him, tomorrow if you can, at the stone table.   
"wheres that?" said lucy.
"ill show you," said mr beaver. "its down the river, a good step from  here. ill take you to it!”
"but meanwhile what about poor mr tumnus?" said lucy.
"the quickest way you can help him is by going to meet aslan," said mr  beaver, "once hes with us, then we can begin doing things. not that we dont need you  too. for thats another of the old rhymes:  when adams flesh and adams bone  sits at cair paravel in throne,  the evil time will be over and done.
so things must be drawing near their end now hes come and youve come.  weve heard of aslan coming into these parts before - long ago, nobody can say when.  but theres never been any of your race here before.”
"thats what i dont understand, mr beaver," said peter, "i mean isnt the  witch herself human?”
"shed like us to believe it," said mr beaver, "and its on that that she  bases her claim to be queen. but shes no daughter of eve. she comes of your father adams" -  (here mr beaver bowed) "your father adams first wife, her they called lilith. and  she was one of the jinn. thats what she comes from on one side. and on the other she  comes of the giants. no, no, there isnt a drop of real human blood in the witch.”
"thats why shes bad all through, mr beaver," said mrs beaver.
"true enough, mrs beaver," replied he, "there may be two views about humans  (meaning no offence to the present company). but theres no two views about things  that look like humans and arent.”
"ive known good dwarfs," said mrs beaver.
"sove i, now you come to speak of it," said her husband, "but precious  few, and they were the ones least like men. but in general, take my advice, when you meet  anything thats going to be human and isnt yet, or used to be human once and isnt  now, or ought to be human and isnt, you keep your eyes on it and feel for your hatchet.  and thats why the witch is always on the lookout for any humans in narnia. shes been  watching for you this many a year, and if she knew there were four of you shed be more  dangerous still.”
"whats that to do with it?" asked peter.
"because of another prophecy," said mr beaver. "down at cair paravel -  thats the castle on the sea coast down at the mouth of this river which ought to be the  capital of the whole country if all was as it should be - down at cair paravel there are  four thrones and its a saying in narnia time out of mind that when two sons of adam and two  daughters of eve sit in those four thrones, then it will be the end not only of the  white witchs reign but of her life, and that is why we had to be so cautious as we came along,  for if she knew about you four, your lives wouldnt be worth a shake of my whiskers!”
all the children had been attending so hard to what mr beaver was telling  them that they had noticed nothing else for a long time. then during the moment of silence  that followed his last remark, lucy suddenly said:  "i say-wheres edmund?”
there was a dreadful pause, and then everyone began asking "who saw him  last? how long has he been missing? is he outside? and then all rushed to the door  and looked out.
the snow was falling thickly and steadily, the green ice of the pool had  vanished under a thick white blanket, and from where the little house stood in the centre of  the dam you could hardly see either bank. out they went, plunging well over their  ankles into the soft new snow, and went round the house in every direction. "edmund! edmund!"  they called till they were hoarse. but the silently falling snow seemed to muffle their  voices and there was not even an echo in answer.
"how perfectly dreadful!" said susan as they at last came back in despair.  "oh, how i wish wed never come.”
"what on earth are we to do, mr beaver?" said peter.
"do?" said mr beaver, who was already putting on his snow-boots, "do? we  must be off at once. we havent a moment to spare!”
"wed better divide into four search parties," said peter, "and all go in  different directions. whoever finds him must come back here at once and-”
"search parties, son of adam?" said mr beaver; "what for?”
"why, to look for edmund, of course!”
"theres no point in looking for him," said mr beaver.
"what do you mean?" said susan. "he cant be far away yet. and weve got to  find him.
what do you mean when you say theres no use looking for him?”
"the reason theres no use looking," said mr beaver, "is that we know  already where hes gone!" everyone stared in amazement. "dont you understand?" said mr  beaver. "hes gone to her, to the white witch. he has betrayed us all.”
"oh, surely-oh, really!" said susan, "he cant have done that.”
"cant he?" said mr beaver, looking very hard at the three children, and  everything they wanted to say died on their lips, for each felt suddenly quite certain  inside that this was exactly what edmund had done.
"but will he know the way?" said peter.
"has he been in this country before?" asked mr beaver. "has he ever been  here alone?”
"yes," said lucy, almost in a whisper. "im afraid he has.”
"and did he tell you what hed done or who hed met?”
"well, no, he didnt," said lucy.
"then mark my words," said mr beaver, "he has already met the white witch  and joined her side, and been told where she lives. i didnt like to mention it before  (he being your brother and all) but the moment i set eyes on that brother of yours i said  to myself `treacherous. he had the look of one who has been with the witch and eaten  her food.
you can always tell them if youve lived long in narnia; something about  their eyes.”
"all the same," said peter in a rather choking sort of voice, "well still  have to go and look for him. he is our brother after all, even if he is rather a little  beast. and hes only a kid.”
"go to the witchs house?" said mrs beaver. "dont you see that the only  chance of saving either him or yourselves is to keep away from her?”
"how do you mean?" said lucy.
"why, all she wants is to get all four of you (shes thinking all the time  of those four thrones at cair paravel). once you were all four inside her house her job  would be done - and thered be four new statues in her collection before youd had time to  speak. but shell keep him alive as long as hes the only one shes got, because shell want  to use him as a decoy; as bait to catch the rest of you with.”
"oh, can no one help us?" wailed lucy.
"only aslan," said mr beaver, "we must go on and meet him. thats our only  chance now.”
"it seems to me, my dears," said mrs beaver, "that it is very important to  know just when he slipped away. how much he can tell her depends on how much he heard. for  instance, had we started talking of aslan before he left? if not, then we may do very  well, for she wont know that aslan has come to narnia, or that we are meeting him, and  will be quite off her guard as far as that is concerned.”
"i dont remember his being here when we were talking about aslan -" began  peter, but lucy interrupted him.
"oh yes, he was," she said miserably; "dont you remember, it was he who  asked whether the witch couldnt turn aslan into stone too?”
"so he did, by jove," said peter; "just the sort of thing he would say,  too!”
"worse and worse," said mr beaver, "and the next thing is this. was he  still here when i told you that the place for meeting aslan was the stone table?”
and of course no one knew the answer to this question.
"because, if he was," continued mr beaver, "then shell simply sledge down  in that direction and get between us and the stone table and catch us on our way  down. in fact we shall be cut off from aslan. “
"but that isnt what shell do first," said mrs beaver, "not if i know her.  the moment that edmund tells her that were all here shell set out to catch us this very  night, and if hes been gone about half an hour, shell be here in about another twenty  minutes.”
"youre right, mrs beaver," said her husband, "we must all get away from  here. theres not a moment to lose.”





CHAPTER NINE

下 *书 **网
in the witchs house  and now of course you want to know what had happened to edmund. he had  eaten his share of the dinner, but he hadnt really enjoyed it because he was  thinking all the time about turkish delight - and theres nothing that spoils the taste of good  ordinary food half so much as the memory of bad magic food. and he had heard the conversation,  and hadnt enjoyed it much either, because he kept on thinking that the others  were taking no notice of him and trying to give him the cold shoulder. they werent, but  he imagined it.
and then he had listened until mr beaver told them about aslan and until he  had heard the whole arrangement for meeting aslan at the stone table. it was then  that he began very quietly to edge himself under the curtain which hung over the door.  for the mention  
of aslan gave him a mysterious and horrible feeling just as it gave the  others a mysterious and lovely feeling.
just as mr beaver had been repeating the rhyme about adams flesh and  adams bone edmund had been very quietly turning the doorhandle; and just before mr  beaver had begun telling them that the white witch wasnt really human at all but half  a jinn and half a giantess, edmund had got outside into the snow and cautiously closed  the door behind him.
you mustnt think that even now edmund was quite so bad that he actually  wanted his brother and sisters to be turned into stone. he did want turkish delight  and to be a prince (and later a king) and to pay peter out for calling him a beast. as for  what the witch would do with the others, he didnt want her to be particularly nice to  them - certainly not to put them on the same level as himself; but he managed to believe, or to  pretend he believed, that she wouldnt do anything very bad to them, "because," he  said to himself, "all these people who say nasty things about her are her enemies and  probably half of it isnt true. she was jolly nice to me, anyway, much nicer than they are. i  expect she is the rightful queen really. anyway, shell be better than that awful aslan!" at  least, that was the excuse he made in his own mind for what he was doing. it wasnt a very  good excuse, however, for deep down inside him he really knew that the white witch was  bad and cruel.
the first thing he realized when he got outside and found the snow falling  all round him, was that he had left his coat behind in the beavers house. and of course  there was no chance of going back to get it now. the next thing he realized was that the  daylight was almost gone, for it had been nearly three oclock when they sat down to  dinner and the winter days were short. he hadnt reckoned on this; but he had to make the  best of it. so he turned up his collar and shuffled across the top of the dam (luckily it  wasnt so slippery since the snow had fallen) to the far side of the river.
it was pretty bad when he reached the far side. it was growing darker every  minute and what with that and the snowflakes swirling all round him he could hardly  see three feet ahead. and then too there was no road. he kept slipping into deep drifts of  snow, and skidding on frozen puddles, and tripping over fallen tree-trunks, and  sliding down steep banks, and barking his shins against rocks, till he was wet and cold and  bruised all over.
the silence and the loneliness were dreadful. in fact i really think he  might have given up the whole plan and gone back and owned up and made friends with the others,  if he hadnt happened to say to himself, "when im king of narnia the first thing  i shall do will be to make some decent roads." and of course that set him off thinking  about being a king and all the other things he would do and this cheered him up a good  deal. he had just settled in his mind what sort of palace he would have and how many  cars and all about his private cinema and where the principal railways would run and  what laws he would make against beavers and dams and was putting the finishing touches  to some schemes for keeping peter in his place, when the weather changed. first the  snow stopped. then a wind sprang up and it became freezing cold. finally, the  clouds rolled  
away and the moon came out. it was a full moon and, shining on all that  snow, it made everything almost as bright as day - only the shadows were rather  confusing.
he would never have found his way if the moon hadnt come out by the time  he got to the other river you remember he had seen (when they first arrived at the  beavers) a smaller river flowing into the great one lower down. he now reached this and turned  to follow it up. but the little valley down which it came was much steeper and rockier  than the one he had just left and much overgrown with bushes, so that he could not have  managed it at all in the dark. even as it was, he got wet through for he had to stoop under  branches and great loads of snow came sliding off on to his back. and every time this  happened he thought more and more how he hated peter - just as if all this had been  peters fault.
but at last he came to a part where it was more level and the valley opened  out. and there, on the other side of the river, quite close to him, in the middle of  a little plain between two hills, he saw what must be the white witchs house. and the  moon was shining brighter than ever. the house was really a small castle. it seemed  to be all towers; little towers with long pointed spires on them, sharp as needles.  they looked like huge dunces caps or sorcerers caps. and they shone in the moonlight and  their long shadows looked strange on the snow. edmund began to be afraid of the house.
but it was too late to think of turning back now.
he crossed the river on the ice and walked up to the house. there was  nothing stirring; not the slightest sound anywhere. even his own feet made no noise on the  deep newly fallen snow. he walked on and on, past corner after corner of the house,  and past turret after turret to find the door. he had to go right round to the far side  before he found it. it was a huge arch but the great iron gates stood wide open.
edmund crept up to the arch and looked inside into the courtyard, and there  he saw a sight that nearly made his heart stop beating. just inside the gate, with  the moonlight shining on it, stood an enormous lion crouched as if it was ready to  spring. and edmund stood in the shadow of the arch, afraid to go on and afraid to go back,  with his knees knocking together. he stood there so long that his teeth would have been  chattering with cold even if they had not been chattering with fear. how long this really  lasted i dont know, but it seemed to edmund to last for hours.
then at last he began to wonder why the lion was standing so still - for it  hadnt moved one inch since he first set eyes on it. edmund now ventured a little  nearer, still keeping in the shadow of the arch as much as he could. he now saw from the way the  lion was standing that it couldnt have been looking at him at all. ("but supposing  it turns its head?" thought edmund.) in fact it was staring at something else namely a  little: dwarf who stood with his back to it about four feet away. "aha!" thought edmund.  "when it springs at the dwarf then will be my chance to escape." but still the lion  never moved, nor did the dwarf. and now at last edmund remembered what the others had  said about the white witch turning people into stone. perhaps this was only a stone  lion. and as soon as he had thought of that he noticed that the lions back and the top  of its head were  
covered with snow. of course it must be only a statue! no living animal  would have let itself get covered with snow. then very slowly and with his heart beating  as if it would burst, edmund ventured to go up to the lion. even now he hardly dared to  touch it, but at last he put out his hand, very quickly, and did. it was cold stone. he had  been frightened of a mere statue!
the relief which edmund felt was so great that in spite of the cold he  suddenly got warm all over right down to his toes, and at the same time there came into his  head what seemed a perfectly lovely idea. "probably," he thought, "this is the great  lion aslan that they were all talking about. shes caught him already and turned him into  stone. so thats the end of all their fine ideas about him! pooh! whos afraid of aslan?”
and he stood there gloating over the stone lion, and presently he did  something very silly and childish. he took a stump of lead pencil out of his pocket and  scribbled a moustache on the lions upper lip and then a pair of spectacles on its eyes. then he  said, "yah! silly old aslan! how do you like being a stone? you thought yourself mighty fine,  didnt you?" but in spite of the scribbles on it the face of the great stone beast  still looked so terrible, and sad, and noble, staring up in the moonlight, that edmund  didnt really get any fun out of jeering at it. he turned away and began to cross the courtyard.
as he got into the middle of it he saw that there were dozens of statues  all about - standing here and there rather as the pieces stand on a chess-board when it  is half-way through the game. there were stone satyrs, and stone wolves, and bears and  foxes and cat-amountains of stone. there were lovely stone shapes that looked like  women but who were really the spirits of trees. there was the great shape of a centaur  and a winged horse and a long lithe creature that edmund took to be a dragon. they all looked  so strange standing there perfectly life-like and also perfectly still, in the bright  cold moonlight, that it was eerie work crossing the courtyard. right in the very middle stood a  huge shape like a man, but as tall as a tree, with a fierce face and a shaggy beard and a  great club in its right hand. even though he knew that it was only a stone giant and not a  live one, edmund did not like going past it.
he now saw that there was a dim light showing from a doorway on the far  side of the courtyard. he went to it; there was a flight of stone steps going up to an  open door.
edmund went up them. across the threshold lay a great wolf.
"its all right, its all right," he kept saying to himself; "its only a  stone wolf. it cant hurt me", and he raised his leg to step over it. instantly the huge creature  rose, with all the hair bristling along its back, opened a great, red mouth and said in a growling  voice:  "whos there? whos there? stand still, stranger, and tell me who you are.”
"if you please, sir," said edmund, trembling so that he could hardly speak,  "my name is edmund, and im the son of adam that her majesty met in the wood the other  day and ive come to bring her the news that my brother and sisters are now in  narnia - quite close, in the beavers house. she - she wanted to see them.”
"i will tell her majesty," said the wolf. "meanwhile, stand still on the  threshold, as you value your life." then it vanished into the house.
edmund stood and waited, his fingers aching with cold and his heart  pounding in his chest, and presently the grey wolf, maugrim, the chief of the witchs  secret police, came bounding back and said, "come in! come in! fortunate favourite of the queen  - or else not so fortunate.”
and edmund went in, taking great care not to tread on the wolfs paws.
he found himself in a long gloomy hall with many pillars, full, as the  courtyard had been, of statues. the one nearest the door was a little faun with a very sad  expression on its face, and edmund couldnt help wondering if this might be lucys friend.  the only light came from a single lamp and close beside this sat the white witch.
"im come, your majesty," said edmund, rushing eagerly forward.
"how dare you come alone?" said the witch in a terrible voice. "did i not  tell you to bring the others with you?”
"please, your majesty," said edmund, "ive done the best i can. ive  brought them quite close. theyre in the little house on top of the dam just up the riverwith  mr and mrs beaver.”
a slow cruel smile came over the witchs face.
"is this all your news?" she asked.
"no, your majesty," said edmund, and proceeded to tell her all he had heard  before leaving the beavers house.
"what! aslan?" cried the queen, "aslan! is this true? if i find you have  lied to me -”
"please, im only repeating what they said," stammered edmund.
but the queen, who was no longer attending to him, clapped her hands.  instantly the same dwarf whom edmund had seen with her before appeared.
"make ready our sledge," ordered the witch, "and use the harness without  bells.”

wＷw。xiabｏok.com



CHAPTER TEN

www.xiabook.com
the spell begins to break  now we must go back to mr and mrs beaver and the three other children. as  soon as mr beaver said, "theres no time to lose," everyone began bundling themselves  into coats, except mrs beaver, who started picking up sacks and laying them on the  table and said: "now, mr beaver, just reach down that ham. and heres a packet of tea, and  theres sugar, and some matches. and if someone will get two or three loaves out of the  crock over there in the corner.”
"what are you doing, mrs beaver?" exclaimed susan.
"packing a load for each of us, dearie," said mrs beaver very coolly. "you  didnt think wed set out on a journey with nothing to eat, did you?”
"but we havent time!" said susan, buttoning the collar of her coat. "she  may be here any minute.”
"thats what i say," chimed in mr beaver.
"get along with you all," said his wife. "think it over, mr beaver. she  cant be here for quarter of an hour at least.”
"but dont we want as big a start as we can possibly get," said peter, "if  were to reach the stone table before her?”
"youve got to remember that, mrs beaver," said susan. "as soon as she has  looked in here and finds were gone shell be off at top speed.”
"that she will," said mrs beaver. "but we cant get there before her  whatever we do, for shell be on a sledge and well be walking.”
"then - have we no hope?" said susan.
"now dont you get fussing, theres a dear," said mrs beaver, "but just get  half a dozen clean handkerchiefs out of the drawer. course weve got a hope. we cant  get there before her but we can keep under cover and go by ways she wont expect and  perhaps well get through.”
"thats true enough, mrs beaver," said her husband. "but its time we were  out of this.”
"and dont you start fussing either, mr beaver," said his wife. "there.  thats better.
theres five loads and the smallest for the smallest of us: thats you, my  dear," she added, looking at lucy.
"oh, do please come on," said lucy.
"well, im nearly ready now," answered mrs beaver at last, allowing her  husband to help her into; her snow-boots. "i suppose the sewing machines took heavy to  bring?”
"yes. it is," said mr beaver. "a great deal too heavy. and you dont think  youll be able to use it while were on the run, i suppose?”
"i cant abide the thought of that witch fiddling with it," said mrs  beaver, "and breaking it or stealing it, as likely as not.”
"oh, please, please, please, do hurry!" said the three children. and so at  last they all got outside and mr beaver locked the door ("itll delay her a bit," he said)  and they set off, all carrying their loads over their shoulders.
the snow had stopped and the moon had come out when they began their  journey. they went in single file - first mr beaver, then lucy, then peter, then susan,  and mrs beaver last of all. mr beaver led them across the dam and on to the right bank of  the river and then along a very rough sort of path among the trees right down by the  river-bank. the sides of the valley, shining in the moonlight, towered up far above them on  either hand.
"best keep down here as much as possible," he said. "shell have to keep to  the top, for you couldnt bring a sledge down here.”
it would have been a pretty enough scene to look at it through a window  from a comfortable armchair; and even as things were, lucy enjoyed it at first.  but as they went on walking and walking - and walking and as the sack she was carrying felt  heavier and heavier, she began to wonder how she was going to keep up at all. and she  stopped looking at the dazzling brightness of the frozen river with all its  waterfalls of ice and at the white masses of the tree-tops and the great glaring moon and the  countless stars and could only watch the little short legs of mr beaver going pad-pad-pad-pad  through the snow in front of her as if they were never going to stop. then the moon  disappeared and the snow began to fall once more. and at last lucy was so tired that she  was almost asleep and walking at the same time when suddenly she found that mr beaver  had turned away from the river-bank to the right and was leading them steeply uphill  into the very thickest bushes. and then as she came fully awake she found that mr beaver  was just vanishing into a little hole in the bank which had been almost hidden under  the bushes until you were quite on top of it. in fact, by the time she realized what  was happening, only his short flat tail was showing.
lucy immediately stooped down and crawled in after him. then she heard  noises of scrambling and puffing and panting behind her and in a moment all five of  them were inside.
"wherever is this?" said peters voice, sounding tired and pale in the  darkness. (i hope you know what i mean by a voice sounding pale.)  "its an old hiding-place for beavers in bad times," said mr beaver, "and a  great secret.
its not much of a place but we must get a few hours sleep.”
"if you hadnt all been in such a plaguey fuss when we were starting, id  have brought some pillows," said mrs beaver.
it wasnt nearly such a nice cave as mr tumnuss, lucy thought - just a  hole in the ground but dry and earthy. it was very small so that when they all lay down they  were all a bundle of clothes together, and what with that and being warmed up by their  long walk they were really rather snug. if only the floor of the cave had been a  little smoother! then mrs beaver handed round in the dark a little flask out of which everyone  drank something - it made one cough and splutter a little and stung the throat,  but it also made you feel deliciously warm after youd swallowed it and everyone went  straight to sleep.
it seemed to lucy only the next minute (though really it was hours and  hours later) when she woke up feeling a little cold and dreadfully stiff and thinking how she  would like a hot bath. then she felt a set of long whiskers tickling her cheek and saw  the cold daylight coming in through the mouth of the cave. but immediately after that she was  very wide awake indeed, and so was everyone else. in fact they were all sitting up  with their mouths and eyes wide open listening to a sound which was the very sound theyd all  been thinking of (and sometimes imagining they heard) during their walk last  night. it was a sound of jingling bells.
mr beaver was out of the cave like a flash the moment he heard it. perhaps  you think, as lucy thought for a moment, that this was a very silly thing to do? but it  was really a very sensible one. he knew he could scramble to the top of the bank among bushes  and brambles without being seen; and he wanted above all things to see which  way the witchs sledge went. the others all sat in the cave waiting and wondering.  they waited nearly five minutes. then they heard something that frightened them very  much. they heard voices. "oh," thought lucy, "hes been seen. shes caught him!”
great was their surprise when a little later, they heard mr beavers voice  calling to them from just outside the cave.
"its all right," he was shouting. "come out, mrs beaver. come out, sons  and daughters of adam. its all right! it isnt her!" this was bad grammar of course, but  that is how beavers talk when they are excited; i mean, in narnia - in our world they  usually dont talk at all.
so mrs beaver and the children came bundling out of the cave, all blinking  in the daylight, and with earth all over them, and looking very frowsty and  unbrushed and uncombed and with the sleep in their eyes.
"come on!" cried mr beaver, who was almost dancing with delight. "come and  see! this is a nasty knock for the witch! it looks as if her power is already  crumbling.”
"what do you mean, mr beaver?" panted peter as they all scrambled up the  steep bank of the valley together.
"didnt i tell you," answered mr beaver, "that shed made it always winter  and never christmas? didnt i tell you? well, just come and see!”
and then they were all at the top and did see.
it was a sledge, and it was reindeer with bells on their harness. but they  were far bigger than the witchs reindeer, and they were not white but brown. and on the  sledge sat a person whom everyone knew the moment they set eyes on him. he was a huge  man. in a bright red robe (bright as hollyberries) with a hood that had fur inside it  and a great white beard, that fell like a foamy waterfall over his chest.
everyone knew him because, though you see people of his sort only in  narnia, you see pictures of them and hear them talked about even in our world - the world  on this side of the wardrobe door. but when you really see them in narnia it is rather  different. some of the pictures of father christmas in our world make him look only funny and  jolly. but now that the children actually stood looking at him they didnt find it  quite like that. he was so big, and so glad, and so real, that they all became quite still.  they felt very glad, but also solemn.
"ive come at last," said he. "she has kept me out for a long time, but i  have got in at last.
aslan is on the move. the witchs magic is weakening.”
and lucy felt running through her that deep shiver of gladness which you  only get if you are being solemn and still.
"and now," said father christmas, "for your presents. there is a new and  better sewing machine for you, mrs beaver. i will drop it in your house as, i pass.”
"if you please, sir," said mrs beaver, making a curtsey. "its locked up.”
"locks and bolts make no difference to me," said father christmas. "and as  for you, mr beaver, when you get home you will find your dam finished and mended and  all the leaks stopped and a new sluicegate fitted.”
mr beaver was so pleased that he opened his mouth very wide and then found  he couldnt say anything at all.
"peter, adams son," said father christmas.
"here, sir," said peter.
"these are your presents," was the answer, "and they are tools not toys.  the time to use them is perhaps near at hand. bear them well." with these words he handed  to peter a shield and a sword. the shield was the colour of silver and across it there  ramped a red lion, as bright as a ripe strawberry at the moment when you pick it. the  hilt of the sword  
was of gold and it had a sheath and a sword belt and everything it needed,  and it was just the right size and weight for peter to use. peter was silent and solemn as  he received these gifts, for he felt they were a very serious kind of present.
"susan, eves daughter," said father christmas. "these are for you," and he  handed her a bow and a quiver full of arrows and a little ivory horn. "you must use the  bow only in great need," he said, "for i do not mean you to fight in the battle. it  does not easily miss.
and when you put this horn to your lips; and blow it, then, wherever you  are, i think help of some kind will come to you.”
last of all he said, "lucy, eves daughter," and lucy came forward. he gave  her a little bottle of what looked like glass (but people said afterwards that it was  made of diamond) and a small dagger. "in this bottle," he said, "there is cordial made of  the juice of one of the fireflowers that grow in the mountains of the sun. if you or any of  your friends is hurt, a few drops of this restore them. and the dagger is to defend yourse at  great need. for you also are not to be in battle.”
"why, sir?" said lucy. "i think - i dont know but i think i could be brave  enough.”
"that is not the point," he said. "but battles are ugly when women fight.  and now" - here he suddenly looked less grave - "here is something for the moment for you  all!" and he brought out (i suppose from the big bag at his back, but nobody quite saw  him do it) a large tray containing five cups and saucers, a bowl of lump sugar, a jug of  cream, and a great big teapot all sizzling and piping hot. then he cried out "merry  christmas! long live the true king!" and cracked his whip, and he and the reindeer and the  sledge and all were out of sight before anyone realized that they had started.
peter had just drawn his sword out of its sheath and was showing it to mr  beaver, when mrs beaver said:  "now then, now then! dont stand talking there till the teas got cold.  just like men. come and help to carry the tray down and well have breakfast. what a mercy i  thought of bringing the bread-knife.”
so down the steep bank they went and back to the cave, and mr beaver cut  some of the bread and ham into sandwiches and mrs beaver poured out the tea and  everyone enjoyed themselves. but long before they had finished enjoying themselves mr beaver  said, "time to be moving on now.”

 www．Ｌｚｕｏｗｅｎ．ｃｏｍ



CHAPTER ELEVEN

！小＠说＃txt＄天＾堂＆
aslan is nearer   
edmund meanwhile had been having a most disappointing time. when the dwarf  had gone to get the sledge ready he expected that the witch would start being  nice to him, as she had been at their last meeting. but she said nothing at all. and when  at last edmund plucked up his courage to say, "please, your majesty, could i have some  turkish delight?
you - you - said -" she answered, "silence, fool!" then she appeared to  change her mind and said, as if to herself, a "and yet it will not do to have the brat  fainting on the way,”
and once more clapped her hands. another, dwarf appeared.
"bring the human creature food and drink," she said.
the dwarf went away and presently returned bringing an iron bowl with some  water in it and an iron plate with a hunk of dry bread on it. he grinned in a repulsive  manner as he set them down on the floor beside edmund and said:  "turkish delight for the little prince. ha! ha! ha!"   "take it away," said edmund sulkily. "i dont want dry bread." but the  witch suddenly turned on him with such a terrible expression on her face that he,  apologized and began to nibble at the bread, though, it was so stale he could hardly get it down.
"you may be glad enough of it before you taste bread again," said the  witch.
while he was still chewing away the first dwarf came back and announced  that the sledge was ready. the white witch rose and went out, ordering edmund to go with  her. the snow was again falling as they came into the courtyard, but she took no  notice of that and made edmund sit beside her on the sledge. but before they drove off she  called maugrim and he came bounding like an enormous dog to the side of the sledge.
"take with you the swiftest of your wolves and go at once to the house of  the beavers,”
said the witch, "and kill whatever you find there. if they are already  gone, then make all speed to the stone table, but do not be seen. wait for me there in hiding.  i meanwhile must go many miles to the west before i find a place where i can drive  across the river.
you may overtake these humans before they reach the stone table. you will  know what to do if you find them!”
"i hear and obey, o queen," growled the wolf, and immediately he shot away  into the snow and darkness, as quickly as a horse can gallop. in a few minutes he  had called another wolf and was with him down on the dam sniffing at the beavers  house. but of course they found it empty. it would have been a dreadful thing for the  beavers and the children if the night had remained fine, for the wolves would then have  been able to follow their trail - and ten to one would have overtaken them before they  had got to the cave. but now that the snow had begun again the scent was cold and even the  footprints were covered up.
meanwhile the dwarf whipped up the reindeer, and the witch and edmund drove  out under the archway and on and away into the darkness and the cold. this was  a terrible  
journey for edmund, who had no coat. before they had been going quarter of  an hour all the front of him was covered with snow - he soon stopped trying to shake it  off because, as quickly as he did that, a new lot gathered, and he was so tired. soon he  was wet to the skin. and oh, how miserable he was! it didnt look now as if the witch  intended to make him a king. all the things he had said to make himself believe that she was  good and kind and that her side was really the right side sounded to him silly now.  he would have given anything to meet the others at this moment - even peter! the only way  to comfort himself now was to try to believe that the whole thing was a dream and that  he might wake up at any moment. and as they went on, hour after hour, it did come to  seem like a dream.
this lasted longer than i could describe even if i wrote pages and pages  about it. but i will skip on to the time when the snow had stopped and the morning had come  and they were racing along in the daylight. and still they went on and on, with no  sound but the everlasting swish of the snow and the creaking of the reindeers harness.  and then at last the witch said, "what have we here? stop!" and they did.
how edmund hoped she was going to say something about breakfast! but she  had stopped for quite a different reason. a little way off at the foot of a  tree sat a merry party, a squirrel and his wife with their children and two satyrs and a dwarf and  an old dogfox, all on stools round a table. edmund couldnt quite see what they were  eating, but it smelled lovely and there seemed to be decorations of holly and he wasnt at  all sure that he didnt see something like a plum pudding. at the moment when the sledge  stopped, the fox, who was obviously the oldest person present, had just risen to its  feet, holding a glass in its right paw as if it was going to say something. but when the  whole party saw the sledge stopping and who was in it, all the gaiety went out of their  faces. the father squirrel stopped eating with his fork half-way to his mouth and one of the  satyrs stopped with its fork actually in its mouth, and the baby squirrels squeaked with  terror.
"what is the meaning of this?" asked the witch queen. nobody answered.
"speak, vermin!" she said again. "or do you want my dwarf to find you a  tongue with his whip? what is the meaning of all this gluttony, this waste, this  selfindulgence? where did you get all these things?”
"please, your majesty," said the fox, "we were given them. and if i might  make so bold as to drink your majestys very good health - “
"who gave them to you?" said the witch.
"f-f-f-father christmas," stammered the fox.
"what?" roared the witch, springing from the sledge and taking a few  strides nearer to the terrified animals. "he has not been here! he cannot have been here! how  dare you - but no. say you have been lying and you shall even now be forgiven.”
at that moment one of the young squirrels lost its head completely.
"he has - he has - he has!" it squeaked, beating its little spoon on the  table. edmund saw the witch bite her lips so that a drop of blood appeared on her white  cheek. then she raised her wand. "oh, dont, dont, please dont," shouted edmund, but even  while he was shouting she had waved her wand and instantly where the merry party had  been there were only statues of creatures (one with its stone fork fixed forever half -way to its stone mouth) seated round a stone table on which there were stone plates and a  stone plum pudding.
"as for you," said the witch, giving edmund a stunning blow on the face as  she re-mounted the sledge, "let that teach you to ask favour for spies and  traitors. drive on!”
and edmund for the first time in this story felt sorry for someone besides  himself. it seemed so pitiful to think of those little stone figures sitting there all  the silent days and all the dark nights, year after year, till the moss grew on them and at  last even their faces crumbled away.
now they were steadily racing on again. and soon edmund noticed that the  snow which splashed against them as they rushed through it was much wetter than it had  been all last night. at the same time he noticed that he was feeling much less cold. it  was also becoming foggy. in fact every minute it grew foggier and warmer. and the  sledge was not running nearly as well as it had been running up till now. at first he  thought this was because the reindeer were tired, but soon he saw that that couldnt be the  real reason. the sledge jerked, and skidded and kept on jolting as if it had struck against  stones. and however the dwarf whipped the poor reindeer the sledge went slower and  slower. there also seemed to be a curious noise all round them, but the noise of their  driving and jolting and the dwarfs shouting at the reindeer prevented edmund from hearing what  it was, until suddenly the sledge stuck so fast that it wouldnt go on at all. when  that happened there was a moments silence. and in that silence edmund could at last  listen to the other noise properly. a strange, sweet, rustling, chattering noise - and yet not  so strange, for hed heard it before - if only he could remember where! then all at once he  did remember. it was the noise of running water. all round them though out of  sight, there were streams, chattering, murmuring, bubbling, splashing and even (in the  distance) roaring. and his heart gave a great leap (though he hardly knew why) when  he realized that the frost was over. and much nearer there was a drip-drip-drip from  the branches of all the trees. and then, as he looked at one tree he saw a great load of  snow slide off it and for the first time since he had entered narnia he saw the dark green of  a fir tree. but he hadnt time to listen or watch any longer, for the witch said:  "dont sit staring, fool! get out and help.”
and of course edmund had to obey. he stepped out into the snow - but it was  really only slush by now - and began helping the dwarf to get the sledge out of the  muddy hole it had got into. they got it out in the end, and by being very cruel to the  reindeer the dwarf managed to get it on the move again, and they drove a little further. and  now the snow was really melting in earnest and patches of green grass were beginning to  appear in  
every direction. unless you have looked at a world of snow as long as  edmund had been looking at it, you will hardly be able to imagine what a relief those green  patches were after the endless white. then the sledge stopped again.
"its no good, your majesty," said the dwarf. "we cant sledge in this  thaw.”
"then we must walk," said the witch.
"we shall never overtake them walking," growled the dwarf. "not with the  start theyve got.”
"are you my councillor or my slave?" said the witch. "do as youre told.  tie the hands of the human creature behind it and keep hold of the end of the rope. and take  your whip.
and cut the harness of the reindeer; theyll find their own way home.”
the dwarf obeyed, and in a few minutes edmund found himself being forced to  walk as fast as he could with his hands tied behind him. he kept on slipping in the  slush and mud and wet grass, and every time he slipped the dwarf gave him a curse and  sometimes a flick with the whip. the witch walked behind the dwarf and kept on saying,  "faster!
faster!”
every moment the patches of green grew bigger and the patches of spow grew  smaller.
every moment more and more of the trees shook off their robes of snow.  soon, wherever you looked, instead of white shapes you saw the dark green of firs or the  black prickly branches of bare oaks and beeches and elms. then the mist turned from white  to gold and presently cleared away altogether. shafts of delicious sunlight struck down  on to the forest floor and overhead you could see a blue sky between the tree tops.
soon there were more wonderful things happening. coming suddenly round a  corner into a glade of silver birch trees edmund saw the ground covered in all  directions with little yellow flowers - celandines. the noise of water grew louder. presently they  actually crossed a stream. beyond it they found snowdrops growing.
"mind your own business!" said the dwarf when he saw that edmund had turned  his head to look at them; and he gave the rope a vicious jerk.
but of course this didnt prevent edmund from seeing. only five minutes  later he noticed a dozen crocuses growing round the foot of an old tree - gold and purple  and white. then came a sound even more delicious than the sound of the water. close beside  the path they were following a bird suddenly chirped from the branch of a tree. it was  answered by the chuckle of another bird a little further off. and then, as if that had been  a signal, there was chattering and chirruping in every direction, and then a moment of full  song, and within five minutes the whole wood was ringing with birds music, and  wherever edmunds eyes turned he saw birds alighting on branches, or sailing  overhead or chasing one another or having their little quarrels or tidying up their feathers  with their beaks.
"faster! faster!" said the witch.
there was no trace of the fog now. the sky became bluer and bluer, and now  there were white clouds hurrying across it from time to time. in the wide glades there  were primroses. a light breeze sprang up which scattered drops of moisture from  the swaying branches and carried cool, delicious scents against the faces of the  travellers. the trees began to come fully alive. the larches and birches were covered with green,  the laburnums with gold. soon the beech trees had put forth their delicate,  transparent leaves.
as the travellers walked under them the light also became green. a bee  buzzed across their path.
"this is no thaw," said the dwarf, suddenly stopping. "this is spring. what  are we to do?
your winter has been destroyed, i tell you! this is aslans doing.”
"if either of you mention that name again," said the witch, "he shall  instantly be killed.”

wＷw。xiabｏok.com



CHAPTER TWELVE

　小＿说  txt 天+堂
peters first battle  while the dwarf and the white witch were saying this, miles away the  beavers and the children were walking on hour after hour into what seemed a delicious  dream. long ago they had left the coats behind them. and by now they had even stopped  saying to one another, "look! theres a kingfisher," or "i say, bluebells!" or "what was  that lovely smell?" or "just listen to that thrush!" they walked on in silence drinking  it all in, passing through patches of warm sunlight into cool, green thickets and out again  into wide mossy glades where tall elms raised the leafy roof far overhead, and then into  dense masses of flowering currant and among hawthorn bushes where the sweet smell was  almost overpowering.
they had been just as surprised as edmund when they saw the winter  vanishing and the whole wood passing in a few hours or so from january to may. they hadnt  even known for certain (as the witch did) that this was what would happen when aslan  came to narnia. but they all knew that it was her spells which had produced the  endless winter; and therefore they all knew when this magic spring began that something had  gone wrong, and badly wrong, with the witchs schemes. and after the thaw had  been going on for some time they all realized that the witch would no longer be able  to use her sledge. after that they didnt hurry so much and they allowed themselves  more rests and longer ones. they were pretty tired by now of course; but not what id call  bitterly tired - only slow and feeling very dreamy and quiet inside as one does when one is  coming to the end of a long day in the open. susan had a slight blister on one heel.
they had left the course of the big river some time ago; for one had to  turn a little to the right (that meant a little to the south) to reach the place of the stone  table. even if this had not been their way they couldnt have kept to the river valley once the  thaw began, for with all that melting snow the river was soon in flood - a wonderful,  roaring, thundering yellow flood - and their path would have been under water.
and now the sun got low and the light got redder and the shadows got longer  and the flowers began to think about closing.
"not long now," said mr beaver, and began leading them uphill across some  very deep, springy moss (it felt nice under their tired feet) in a place where only  tall trees grew, very wide apart. the climb, coming at the end of the long day, made them all  pant and blow.
and just as lucy was wondering whether she could really get to the top  without another long rest, suddenly they were at the top. and this is what they saw.
they were on a green open space from which you could look down on the  forest spreading as far as one could see in every direction - except right ahead.  there, far to the east, was something twinkling and moving. "by gum!" whispered peter to  susan, "the sea!" in the very middle of this open hill-top was the stone table. it was  a great grim slab of grey stone supported on four upright stones. it looked very old; and it  was cut all over with strange lines and figures that might be the letters of an unknown  language. they gave you a curious feeling when you looked at them. the next thing they saw  was a pavilion pitched on one side of the open place. a wonderful pavilion it was  - and especially now when the light of the setting sun fell upon it - with sides  of what looked like yellow silk and cords of crimson and tent-pegs of ivory; and high  above it on a pole a banner which bore a red rampant lion fluttering in the breeze which was  blowing in their faces from the far-off sea. while they were looking at this they heard a  sound of music on their right; and turning in that direction they saw what they had come to  see.
aslan stood in the centre of a crowd of creatures who had grouped  themselves round him in the shape of a half-moon. there were tree-women there and well-women  (dryads and naiads as they used to be called in our world) who had stringed  instruments; it was they who had made the music. there were four great centaurs. the horse part  of them was like huge english farm horses, and the man part was like stern but  beautiful giants.
there was also a unicorn, and a bull with the head of a man, and a pelican,  and an eagle, and a great dog. and next to aslan stood two leopards of whom one carried  his crown and the other his standard.
but as for aslan himself, the beavers and the children didnt know what to  do or say when they saw him. people who have not been in narnia sometimes think that  a thing cannot be good and terrible at the same time. if the children had ever  thought so, they were cured of it now. for when they tried to look at aslans face they just  caught a glimpse of the golden mane and the great, royal, solemn, overwhelming eyes;  and then they found they couldnt look at him and went all trembly.
"go on," whispered mr beaver.
"no," whispered peter, "you first.”
"no, sons of adam before animals," whispered mr beaver back again.
"susan," whispered peter, "what about you? ladies first.”
"no, youre the eldest," whispered susan. and of course the longer they  went on doing this the more awkward they felt. then at last peter realized that it was up  to him. he drew his sword and raised it to the salute and hastily saying to the others  "come on. pull yourselves together," he advanced to the lion and said:  "we have come - aslan.”
"welcome, peter, son of adam," said aslan. "welcome, susan and lucy,  daughters of eve. welcome he-beaver and she-beaver.”
his voice was deep and rich and somehow took the fidgets out of them. they  now felt glad and quiet and it didnt seem awkward to them to stand and say nothing.
"but where is the fourth?" asked aslan.
"he has tried to betray them and joined the white witch, o aslan," said mr  beaver. and then something made peter say,  "that was partly my fault, aslan. i was angry with him and i think that  helped him to go wrong.”
and aslan said nothing either to excuse peter or to blame him but merely  stood looking at him with his great unchanging eyes. and it seemed to all of them that  there was nothing to be said.
"please - aslan," said lucy, "can anything be done to save edmund?”
"all shall be done," said aslan. "but it may be harder than you think." and  then he was silent again for some time. up to that moment lucy had been thinking how  royal and strong and peaceful his face looked; now it suddenly came into her head  that he looked sad as well. but next minute that expression was quite gone. the lion shook  his mane and clapped his paws together ("terrible paws," thought lucy, "if he didnt  know how to velvet them!") and said,  "meanwhile, let the feast be prepared. ladies, take these daughters of eve  to the pavilion and minister to them.”
when the girls had gone aslan laid his paw - and though it was velveted it  was very heavy - on peters shoulder and said, "come, son of adam, and i will show  you a far-off sight of the castle where you are to be king.”
and peter with his sword still drawn in his hand went with the lion to the  eastern edge of the hilltop. there a beautiful sight met their eyes. the sun was setting  behind their backs.
that meant that the whole country below them lay in the evening light -  forest and hills and valleys and, winding away like a silver snake, the lower part of the  great river. and beyond all this, miles away, was the sea, and beyond the sea the sky, full  of clouds which were just turning rose colour with the reflection of the sunset. but just  where the land of narnia met the sea - in fact, at the mouth of the great river - there was  something on a little hill, shining. it was shining because it was a castle and of course  the sunlight was reflected from all the windows which looked towards peter and the sunset;  but to peter it looked like a great star resting on the seashore.
"that, o man," said aslan, "is cair paravel of the four thrones, in one of  which you must sit as king. i show it to you because you are the first-born and you will  be high king over all the rest.”
and once more peter said nothing, for at that moment a strange noise woke  the silence suddenly. it was like a bugle, but richer.
"it is your sisters horn," said aslan to peter in a low voice; so low as  to be almost a purr, if it is not disrespectful to think of a lion purring.
for a moment peter did not understand. then, when he saw all the other  creatures start forward and heard aslan say with a wave of his paw, "back! let the prince  win his spurs," he did understand, and set off running as hard as he could to the  pavilion. and there he saw a dreadful sight.
the naiads and dryads were scattering in every direction. lucy was running  towards him as fast as her short legs would carry her and her face was as white as  paper. then he saw susan make a dash for a tree, and swing herself up, followed by a huge grey  beast. at first peter thought it was a bear. then he saw that it looked like an  alsatian, though it was far too big to be a dog. then he realized that it was a wolf - a wolf  standing on its hind legs, with its front paws against the tree-trunk, snapping and snarling.  all the hair on its back stood up on end. susan had not been able to get higher than the second  big branch.
one of her legs hung down so that her foot was only an inch or two above  the snapping teeth. peter wondered why she did not get higher or at least take a better  grip; then he realized that she was just going to faint and that if she fainted she would  fall off.
peter did not feel very brave; indeed, he felt he was going to be sick. but  that made no difference to what he had to do. he rushed straight up to the monster and  aimed a slash of his sword at its side. that stroke never reached the wolf. quick as  lightning it turned round, its eyes flaming, and its mouth wide open in a howl of anger. if it  had not been so angry that it simply had to howl it would have got him by the throat at  once. as it was -  
though all this happened too quickly for peter to think at all - he had  just time to duck down and plunge his sword, as hard as he could, between the brutes  forelegs into its heart. then came a horrible, confused moment like something in a nightmare.  he was tugging and pulling and the wolf seemed neither alive nor dead, and its  bared teeth knocked against his forehead, and everything was blood and heat and hair. a  moment later he found that the monster lay dead and he had drawn his sword out of  it and was straightening his back and rubbing the sweat off his face and out of his  eyes. he felt tired all over.
then, after a bit, susan came down the tree. she and peter felt pretty  shaky when they met and i wont say there wasnt kissing and crying on both sides. but in  narnia no one thinks any the worse of you for that.
"quick! quick!" shouted the voice of aslan. "centaurs! eagles! i see  another wolf in the thickets. there - behind you. he has just darted away. after him, all of  you. he will be going to his mistress. now is your chance to find the witch and rescue the  fourth son of adam." and instantly with a thunder of hoofs and beating of wings a dozen  or so of the swiftest creatures disappeared into the gathering darkness.
peter, still out of breath, turned and saw aslan close at hand.
"you have forgotten to clean your sword," said aslan.
it was true. peter blushed when he looked at the bright blade and saw it  all smeared with the wolfs hair and blood. he stooped down and wiped it quite clean on the  grass, and then wiped it quite dry on his coat.
"hand it to me and kneel, son of adam," said aslan. and when peter had done  so he struck him with the flat of the blade and said, "rise up, sir peter wolfs -bane. and, whatever happens, never forget to wipe your sword.”
now we must get back to edmund. when he had been made to walk far further  than he had ever known that anybody could walk, the witch at last halted in a dark  valley all overshadowed with fir trees and yew trees. edmund simply sank down and lay  on his face doing nothing at all and not even caring what was going to happen next  provided they would let him lie still. he was too tired even to notice how hungry  and thirsty he was. the witch and the dwarf were talking close beside him in low tones.
"no," said the dwarf, "it is no use now, o queen. they must have reached  the stone table by now.”
"perhaps the wolf will smell us out and bring us news," said the witch.
"it cannot be good news if he does," said the dwarf.
"four thrones in cair paravel," said the witch. "how if only three were  filled? that would not fulfil the prophecy.”
"what difference would that make now that he is here?" said the dwarf. he  did not dare, even now, to mention the name of aslan to his mistress.
"he may not stay long. and then - we would fall upon the three at cair.”
"yet it might be better," said the dwarf, "to keep this one" (here he  kicked edmund) "for bargaining with.”





CHAPTER THIRTEEN

（小／说／t／xt｜天｜堂）
deep magic from the dawn of time  "yes! and have him rescued," said the witch scornfully.
"then," said the dwarf, "we had better do what we have to do at once.”
"i would like to have it done on the stone table itself," said the witch.  "that is the proper place. that is where it has always been done before.”
"it will be a long time now before the stone table can again be put to its  proper use,”
said the dwarf.
"true," said the witch; and then, "well, i will begin.”
at that moment with a rush and a snarl a wolf rushed up to them.
"i have seen them. they are all at the stone table, with him. they have  killed my captain, maugrim. i was hidden in the thickets and saw it all. one of the  sons of adam killed him. fly! fly!”
"no," said the witch. "there need be no flying. go quickly. summon all our  people to meet me here as speedily as they can. call out the giants and the  werewolves and the spirits of those trees who are on our side. call the ghouls, and the  boggles, the ogres and the minotaurs. call the cruels, the hags, the spectres, and the people of  the toadstools.
we will fight. what? have i not still my wand? will not their ranks turn  into stone even as they come on? be off quickly, i have a little thing to finish here while  you are away.”
the great brute bowed its head, turned, and galloped away.
"now!" she said, "we have no table - let me see. we had better put it  against the trunk of a tree.”
edmund found himself being roughly forced to his feet. then the dwarf set  him with his back against a tree and bound him fast. he saw the witch take off her outer  mantle. her arms were bare underneath it and terribly white. because they were so very  white he could see them, but he could not see much else, it was so dark in this  valley under the dark trees.
"prepare the victim,", said the witch. and the dwarf undid edmunds collar  and folded back his shirt at the neck. then he took edmunds hair and pulled his head  back so that he had to raise his chin. after that edmund heard a strange noise - whizz  whizz - whizz. for a moment he couldnt think what it was. then he realized. it was the sound  of a knife being sharpened.
at that very moment he heard loud shouts from every direction - a drumming  of hoofs and a beating of wings - a scream from the witch - confusion all round him.  and then he found he was being untied. strong arms were round him and he heard big,  kind voices saying things like -  "let him lie down - give him some wine - drink this - steady now - youll  be all right in a minute.”
then he heard the voices of people who were not talking to him but to one  another. and they were saying things like "whos got the witch?" "i thought you had  her." "i didnt see her after i knocked the knife out of her hand - i was after the dwarf - do  you mean to say shes escaped?" "- a chap cant mind everything at once - whats that? oh,  sorry, its only an old stump!" but just at this point edmund went off in a dead faint.
presently the centaurs and unicorns and deer and birds (they were of course  the rescue party which aslan had sent in the last chapter) all set off to go back to  the stone table, carrying edmund with them. but if they could have seen what happened in  that valley after they had gone, i think they might have been surprised.
it was perfectly still and presently the moon grew bright; if you had been  there you would have seen the moonlight shining on an old tree-stump and on a fairsized  boulder. but if you had gone on looking you would gradually have begun to think there was  something odd about both the stump and the boulder. and next you would have thought  that the stump did look really remarkably like a little fat man crouching on the  ground. and if you had watched long enough you would have seen the stump walk across to  the boulder and the boulder sit up and begin talking to the stump; for in reality the  stump and the boulder were simply the witch and the dwarf. for it was part of her magic  that she could make things look like what they arent, and she had the presence of mind to  do so at the very moment when the knife was knocked out of her hand. she had kept hold  of her wand, so it had been kept safe, too.
when the other children woke up next morning (they had been sleeping on  piles of cushions in the pavilion) the first thing they heard -from mrs beaver - was  that their brother had been rescued and brought into camp late last night; and was at  that moment with aslan. as soon as they had breakfasted4 they all went out, and there  they saw aslan and edmund walking together in the dewy grass, apart from the rest of the  court. there is no need to tell you (and no one ever heard) what aslan was saying, but it  was a conversation which edmund never forgot. as the others drew nearer aslan  turned to meet them, bringing edmund with him.
"here is your brother," he said, "and - there is no need to talk to him  about what is past.”
edmund shook hands with each of the others and said to each of them in  turn, "im sorry," and everyone said, "thats all right." and then everyone wanted  very hard to say something which would make it quite clear that they were all friends with  him again -something ordinary and natural -and of course no one could think of  anything in the world to say. but before they had time to feel really awkward one of the  leopards approached aslan and said,  "sire, there is a messenger from the enemy who craves audience.”
"let him approach," said aslan.
the leopard went away and soon returned leading the witchs dwarf.
"what is your message, son of earth?" asked aslan.
"the queen of narnia and empress of the lone islands desires a safe conduct  to come and speak with you," said the dwarf, "on a matter which is as much to your  advantage as to hers.”
"queen of narnia, indeed!" said mr beaver. "of all the cheek -”
"peace, beaver," said aslan. "all names will soon be restored to their  proper owners. in the meantime we will not dispute about them. tell your mistress, son of  earth, that i grant her safe conduct on condition that she leaves her wand behind her at  that great oak.”
this was agreed to and two leopards went back with the dwarf to see that  the conditions were properly carried out. "but supposing she turns the two leopards into  stone?”
whispered lucy to peter. i think the same idea had occurred to the leopards  themselves; at any rate, as they walked off their fur was all standing up on their  backs and their tails were bristling - like a cats when it sees a strange dog.
"itll be all right," whispered peter in reply. "he wouldnt send them if  it werent.”
a few minutes later the witch herself walked out on to the top of the hill  and came straight across and stood before aslan. the three children who had not seen  her before  
felt shudders running down their backs at the sight of her face; and there  were low growls among all the animals present. though it was bright sunshine everyone felt  suddenly cold. the only two people present who seemed to be quite at their ease were  aslan and the witch herself. it was the oddest thing to see those two faces - the  golden face and the dead-white face so close together. not that the witch looked aslan exactly  in his eyes; mrs beaver particularly noticed this.
"you have a traitor there, aslan," said the witch. of course everyone  present knew that she meant edmund. but edmund had got past thinking about himself after all  hed been through and after the talk hed had that morning. he just went on looking  at aslan. it didnt seem to matter what the witch said.
"well," said aslan. "his offence was not against you.”
"have you forgotten the deep magic?" asked the witch.
"let us say i have forgotten it," answered aslan gravely. "tell us of this  deep magic.”
"tell you?" said the witch, her voice growing suddenly shriller. "tell you  what is written on that very table of stone which stands beside us? tell you what is  written in letters deep as a spear is long on the firestones on the secret hill? tell you what  is engraved on the sceptre of the emperor-beyond-the-sea? you at least know the magic  which the emperor put into narnia at the very beginning. you know that every traitor  belongs to me as my lawful prey and that for every treachery i have a right to a kill.”
"oh," said mr beaver. "so thats how you came to imagine yourself a queen -  because you were the emperors hangman. i see.”
"peace, beaver," said aslan, with a very low growl. "and so," continued the  witch, "that human creature is mine. his life is forfeit to me. his blood is my  property.”
"come and take it then," said the bull with the mans head in a great  bellowing voice.
"fool," said the witch with a savage smile that was almost a snarl, "do you  really think your master can rob me of my rights by mere force? he knows the deep magic  better than that. he knows that unless i have blood as the law says all narnia  will be overturned and perish in fire and water.”
"it is very true," said aslan, "i do not deny it.”
"oh, aslan!" whispered susan in the lions ear, "cant we - i mean, you  wont, will you?
cant we do something about the deep magic? isnt there something you can  work against it?”
"work against the emperors magic?" said aslan, turning to her with  something like a frown on his face. and nobody ever made that suggestion to him again.
edmund was on the other side of aslan, looking all the time at aslans  face. he felt a choking feeling and wondered if he ought to say something; but a moment  later he felt that he was not expected to do anything except to wait, and do what he was  told.
"fall back, all of you," said aslan, "and i will talk to the witch alone.”
they all obeyed. it was a terrible time this - waiting and wondering while  the lion and the witch talked earnestly together in low voices. lucy said, "oh, edmund!"  and began to cry. peter stood with his back to the others looking out at the distant  sea. the beavers stood holding each others paws with their heads bowed. the centaurs  stamped uneasily with their hoofs. but everyone became perfectly still in the end, so that  you noticed even small sounds like a bumble-bee flying past, or the birds in the forest down  below them, or the wind rustling the leaves. and still the talk between aslan and the  white witch went on.
at last they heard aslans voice, "you can all come back," he said. "i have  settled the matter. she has renounced the claim on your brothers blood." and all over  the hill there was a noise as if everyone had been holding their breath and had now begun  breathing again, and then a murmur of talk.
the witch was just turning away with a look of fierce joy on her face when  she stopped and said,  "but how do i know this promise will be kept?”
"haa-a-arrh!" roared aslan, half rising from his throne; and his great  mouth opened wider and wider and the roar grew louder and louder, and the witch, after staring  for a moment with her lips wide apart, picked up her skirts and fairly ran for her life.

　



CHAPTER FOURTEEN

www.lzuowen.com
the triumph of the witch  as soon as the witch had gone aslan said, "we must move from this place at  once, it will be wanted for other purposes. we shall encamp tonight at the fords of  beruna.
of course everyone was dying to ask him how he had arranged matters with  the witch; but his face was stern and everyones ears were still ringing with the  sound of his roar and so nobody dared.
after a meal, which was taken in the open air on the hill-top (for the sun  had got strong by now and dried the grass), they were busy for a while taking the pavilion  down and  
packing things up. before two oclock they were on the march and set off in  a northeasterly direction, walking at an easy pace for they had not far to  go.
during the first part of the journey aslan explained to peter his plan of  campaign. "as soon as she has finished her business in these parts," he said, "the witch  and her crew will almost certainly fall back to her house and prepare for a siege. you  may or may not be able to cut her off and prevent her from reaching it."  he then went on  to outline two plans of battle - one for fighting the witch and her people in the wood and  another for assaulting her castle. and all the time he was advising peter how to  conduct the operations, saying things like, "you must put your centaurs in such and  such a place" or "you must post scouts to see that she doesnt do so-and-so," till at last  peter said,  "but you will be there yourself, aslan.”
"i can give you no promise of that," answered the lion. and he continued  giving peter his instructions.
for the last part of the journey it was susan and lucy who saw most of him.  he did not talk very much and seemed to them to be sad.
it was still afternoon when they came down to a place where the river  valley had widened out and the river was broad and shallow. this was the fords of beruna and  aslan gave orders to halt on this side of the water. but peter said,  "wouldnt it be better to camp on the far side - for fear she should try a  night attack or anything?”
aslan, who seemed to have been thinking about something else, roused  himself with a shake of his magnificent mane and said, "eh? whats that?" peter said it  all over again.
"no," said aslan in a dull voice, as if it didnt matter. "no. she will not  make an attack to-night." and then he sighed deeply. but presently he added, "all the same  it was well thought of. that is how a soldier ought to think. but it doesnt really  matter." so they proceeded to pitch their camp.
aslans mood affected everyone that evening. peter was feeling  uncomfortable too at the idea of fighting the battle on his own; the news that aslan might not be  there had come as a great shock to him. supper that evening was a quiet meal. everyone felt  how different it had been last night or even that morning. it was as if the good times,  having just begun, were already drawing to their end.
this feeling affected susan so much that she couldnt get to sleep when she  went to bed.
and after she had lain counting sheep and turning over and over she heard  lucy give a long sigh and turn over just beside her in the darkness.
"cant you get to sleep either?" said susan.
"no," said lucy. "i thought you were asleep. i say, susan!”
"what?”
"ive a most horrible feeling - as if something were hanging over us.”
"have you? because, as a matter of fact, so have i.”
"something about aslan," said lucy. "either some dreadful thing is going to  happen to him, or something dreadful that hes going to do.”
"theres been something wrong with him all afternoon," said susan. "lucy!  what was that he said about not being with us at the battle? you dont think he  could be stealing away and leaving us tonight, do you?”
"where is he now?" said lucy. "is he here in the pavilion?”
"i dont think so.”
"susan! lets go outside and have a look round. we might see him.”
"all right. lets," said susan; "we might just as well be doing that as  lying awake here.”
very quietly the two girls groped their way among the other sleepers and  crept out of the tent. the moonlight was bright and everything was quite still except for  the noise of the river chattering over the stones. then susan suddenly caught lucys arm and  said, "look!" on the far side of the camping ground, just where the trees began,  they saw the lion slowly walking away from them into the wood. without a word they both  followed him.
he led them up the steep slope out of the river valley and then slightly to  the right - apparently by the very same route which they had used that afternoon in  coming from the hill of the stone table. on and on he led them, into dark shadows and out  into pale moonlight, getting their feet wet with the heavy dew. he looked somehow  different from the aslan they knew. his tail and his head hung low and he walked slowly as  if he were very, very tired. then, when they were crossing a wide open place where  there where no shadows for them to hide in, he stopped and looked round. it was no good  trying to run away so they came towards him. when they were closer he said,  "oh, children, children, why are you following me?”
"we couldnt sleep," said lucy - and then felt sure that she need say no  more and that aslan knew all they had been thinking.
"please, may we come with you - wherever youre going?" asked susan.
"well -" said aslan, and seemed to be thinking. then he said, "i should be  glad of company tonight. yes, you may come, if you will promise to stop when i tell  you, and after that leave me to go on alone.”
"oh, thank you, thank you. and we will," said the two girls.
forward they went again and one of the girls walked on each side of the  lion. but how slowly he walked! and his great, royal head drooped so that his nose nearly  touched the grass. presently he stumbled and gave a low moan.
"aslan! dear aslan!" said lucy, "what is wrong? cant you tell us?”
"are you ill, dear aslan?" asked susan.
"no," said aslan. "i am sad and lonely. lay your hands on my mane so that i  can feel you are there and let us walk like that.”
and so the girls did what they would never have dared to do without his  permission, but what they had longed to do ever since they first saw him buried their cold  hands in the beautiful sea of fur and stroked it and, so doing, walked with him. and  presently they saw that they were going with him up the slope of the hill on which the  stone table stood. they went up at the side where the trees came furthest up, and when  they got to the last tree (it was one that had some bushes about it) aslan stopped and  said,  "oh, children, children. here you must stop. and whatever happens, do not  let yourselves be seen. farewell.”
and both the girls cried bitterly (though they hardly knew why) and clung  to the lion and kissed his mane and his nose and his paws and his great, sad eyes. then he  turned from them and walked out on to the top of the hill. and lucy and susan,  crouching in the bushes, looked after him, and this is what they saw.
a great crowd of people were standing all round the stone table and though  the moon was shining many of them carried torches which burned with evil-looking red  flames and black smoke. but such people! ogres with monstrous teeth, and wolves, and  bull-headed men; spirits of evil trees and poisonous plants; and other creatures whom i  wont describe because if i did the grownups would probably not let you read this book -  cruels and hags and incubuses, wraiths, horrors, efreets, sprites, orknies, wooses,  and ettins. in fact here were all those who were on the witchs side and whom the wolf had  summoned at her command. and right in the middle, standing by the table, was the  witch herself.
a howl and a gibber of dismay went up from the creatures when they first  saw the great lion pacing towards them, and for a moment even the witch seemed to be  struck with fear. then she recovered herself and gave a wild fierce laugh.
"the fool!" she cried. "the fool has come. bind him fast.”
lucy and susan held their breaths waiting for aslans roar and his spring  upon his enemies. but it never came. four hags, grinning and leering, yet also (at  first) hanging back and half afraid of what they had to do, had approached him. "bind him,  i say!”
repeated the white witch. the hags made a dart at him and shrieked with  triumph when they found that he made no resistance at all. then others - evil dwarfs and  apes - rushed in to help them, and between them they rolled the huge lion over on his  back and tied all his four paws together, shouting and cheering as if they had done something  brave, though, had the lion chosen, one of those paws could have been the death of  them all.
but he made no noise, even when the enemies, straining and tugging, pulled  the cords so tight that they cut into his flesh. then they began to drag him towards the  stone table.
"stop!" said the witch. "let him first be shaved.”
another roar of mean laughter went up from her followers as an ogre with a  pair of shears came forward and squatted down by aslans head. snip-snip-snip went  the shears and masses of curling gold began to fall to the ground. then the ogre stood  back and the children, watching from their hiding-place, could see the face of aslan  looking all small and different without its mane. the enemies also saw the difference.
"why, hes only a great cat after all!" cried one.
"is that what we were afraid of?" said another.
and they surged round aslan, jeering at him, saying things like "puss,  puss! poor pussy,”
and "how many mice have you caught today, cat?" and "would you like a  saucer of milk, pussums?”
"oh, how can they?" said lucy, tears streaming down her cheeks. "the  brutes, the brutes!" for now that the first shock was over the shorn face of aslan  looked to her braver, and more beautiful, and more patient than ever.
"muzzle him!" said the witch. and even now, as they worked about his face  putting on the muzzle, one bite from his jaws would have cost two or three of them  their hands. but he never moved. and this seemed to enrage all that rabble. everyone was at  him now.
those who had been afraid to come near him even after he was bound began to  find their courage, and for a few minutes the two girls could not even see him - so  thickly was he surrounded by the whole crowd of creatures kicking him, hitting him,  spitting on him, jeering at him.
at last the rabble had had enough of this. they began to drag the bound and  muzzled lion to the stone table, some pulling and some pushing. he was so huge that  even when they got him there it took all their efforts to hoist him on to the surface  of it. then there was more tying and tightening of cords.
"the cowards! the cowards!" sobbed susan. "are they still afraid of him,  even now?”
when once aslan had been tied (and tied so that he was really a mass of  cords) on the flat stone, a hush fell on the crowd. four hags, holding four torches, stood at  the corners of the table. the witch bared her arms as she had bared them the previous  night when it had been edmund instead of aslan. then she began to whet her knife. it  looked to the children, when the gleam of the torchlight fell on it, as if the knife were  made of stone, not of steel, and it was of a strange and evil shape.
as last she drew near. she stood by aslans head. her face was working and  twitching with passion, but his looked up at the sky, still quiet, neither angry nor  afraid, but a little sad. then, just before she gave the blow, she stooped down and said in a  quivering voice,  "and now, who has won? fool, did you think that by all this you would save  the human traitor? now i will kill you instead of him as our pact was and so the deep  magic will be appeased. but when you are dead what will prevent me from killing him as  well? and who will take him out of my hand then? understand that you have given me  narnia forever, you have lost your own life and you have not saved his. in that  knowledge, despair and die.”
the children did not see the actual moment of the killing. they couldnt  bear to look and had covered their eyes.

 www.xiabook.com 



CHAPTER FIFTEEN

www.xiaboＯk.com
deeper magic from before the dawn of time  while the two girls still crouched in the bushes with their hands over  their faces, they heard the voice of the witch calling out,  "now! follow me all and we will set about what remains of this war! it will  not take us long to crush the human vermin and the traitors now that the great fool,  the great cat, lies dead.”
at this moment the children were for a few seconds in very great danger.  for with wild cries and a noise of skirling pipes and shrill horns blowing, the whole of  that vile rabble came sweeping off the hill-top and down the slope right past their hiding- place. they felt the spectres go by them like a cold wind and they felt the ground shake  beneath them under the galloping feet of the minotaurs; and overhead there went a flurry  of foul wings and a blackness of vultures and giant bats. at any other time they would  have trembled with fear; but now the sadness and shame and horror of aslans death so  filled their minds that they hardly thought of it.
as soon as the wood was silent again susan and lucy crept out onto the open  hill-top.
the moon was getting low and thin clouds were passing across her, but still  they could see the shape of the lion lying dead in his bonds. and down they both knelt  in the wet grass and kissed his cold face and stroked his beautiful fur - what was  left of it - and cried till they could cry no more. and then they looked at each other and held  each others hands for mere loneliness and cried again; and then again were silent. at  last lucy said,  "i cant bear to look at that horrible muzzle. i wonder could we take if  off?”
so they tried. and after a lot of working at it (for their fingers were  cold and it was now the darkest part of the night) they succeeded. and when they saw his face  without it they burst out crying again and kissed it and fondled it and wiped away the  blood and the foam as well as they could. and it was all more lonely and hopeless and  horrid than i know how to describe.
"i wonder could we untie him as well?" said susan presently. but the  enemies, out of pure spitefulness, had drawn the cords so tight that the girls could make  nothing of the knots.
i hope no one who reads this book has been quite as miserable as susan and  lucy were that night; but if you have been - if youve been up all night and cried  till you have no more tears left in you - you will know that there comes in the end a sort  of quietness. you feel as if nothing was ever going to happen again. at any rate that was how  it felt to these two. hours and hours seemed to go by in this dead calm, and they hardly  noticed that they were getting colder and colder. but at last lucy noticed two other  things. one was that the sky on the east side of the hill was a little less dark than it  had been an hour ago.
the other was some tiny movement going on in the grass at her feet. at  first she took no interest in this. what did it matter? nothing mattered now! but at last she  saw that whatever-it-was had begun to move up the upright stones of the stone table.  and now whatever-they-were were moving about on aslans body. she peered closer.  they were little grey things.
"ugh!" said susan from the other side of the table. "how beastly! there are  horrid little mice crawling over him. go away, you little beasts." and she raised her  hand to frighten them away.
"wait!" said lucy, who had been looking at them more closely still. "can  you see what theyre doing?”
both girls bent down and stared.
"i do believe -" said susan. "but how queer! theyre nibbling away at the  cords!”
"thats what i thought," said lucy. "i think theyre friendly mice. poor  little things - they dont realize hes dead. they think itll do some good untying him.”
it was quite definitely lighter by now. each of the girls noticed for the  first time the white face of the other. they could see the mice nibbling away; dozens and  dozens, even hundreds, of little field mice. and at last, one by one, the ropes were all  gnawed through.
the sky in the east was whitish by now and the stars were getting fainter -  all except one very big one low down on the eastern horizon. they felt colder than they  had been all night. the mice crept away again.
the girls cleared away the remains of the gnawed ropes. aslan looked more  like himself without them. every moment his dead face looked nobler, as the light grew  and they could see it better.
in the wood behind them a bird gave a chuckling sound. it had been so still  for hours and hours that it startled them. then another bird answered it. soon there were  birds singing all over the place.
it was quite definitely early morning now, not late night.
"im so cold," said lucy.
"so am i," said susan. "lets walk about a bit.”
they walked to the eastern edge of the hill and looked down. the one big  star had almost disappeared. the country all looked dark grey, but beyond, at the very end  of the world, the sea showed pale. the sky began to turn red. they walked to ands fro  more times than they could count between the dead aslan and the eastern ridge, trying to  keep warm; and oh, how tired their legs felt. then at last, as they stood for a moment  looking out towards they sea and cair paravel (which they could now just make out) the red  turned to gold along the line where the sea and the sky met and very slowly up came the  edge of the sun.
at that moment they heard from behind them a loud noise - a great cracking,  deafening noise as if a giant had broken a giants plate.
"whats that?" said lucy, clutching susans arm.
"i - i feel afraid to turn round," said susan; "something awful is  happening.”
"theyre doing something worse to him," said lucy. "come on!" and she  turned, pulling susan round with her.
the rising of the sun had made everything look so different - all colours  and shadows were changed that for a moment they didnt see the important thing. then  they did. the stone table was broken into two pieces by a great crack that ran down it  from end to end; and there was no aslan.
"oh, oh, oh!" cried the two girls, rushing back to the table.
"oh, its too bad," sobbed lucy; "they might have left the body alone.”
"whos done it?" cried susan. "what does it mean? is it magic?”
"yes!" said a great voice behind their backs. "it is more magic." they  looked round.
there, shining in the sunrise, larger than they had seen him before,  shaking his mane (for it had apparently grown again) stood aslan himself.
"oh, aslan!" cried both the children, staring up at him, almost as much  frightened as they were glad.
"arent you dead then, dear aslan?" said lucy.
"not now," said aslan.
"youre not - not a - ?" asked susan in a shaky voice. she couldnt bring  herself to say the word ghost. aslan stooped his golden head and licked her forehead. the  warmth of his breath and a rich sort of smell that seemed to hang about his hair came all  over her.
"do i look it?" he said.
"oh, youre real, youre real! oh, aslan!" cried lucy, and both girls flung  themselves upon him and covered him with kisses.
"but what does it all mean?" asked susan when they were somewhat calmer.
"it means," said aslan, "that though the witch knew the deep magic, there  is a magic deeper still which she did not know: her knowledge goes back only to the  dawn of time.
but if she could have looked a little further back, into the stillness and  the darkness before time dawned, she would have read there a different incantation. she  would have known that when a willing victim who had committed no treachery was killed  in a traitors stead, the table would crack and death itself would start working  backwards.
and now -”
"oh yes. now?" said lucy, jumping up and clapping her hands.
"oh, children," said the lion, "i feel my strength coming back to me. oh,  children, catch me if you can!" he stood for a second, his eyes very bright, his limbs  quivering, lashing himself with his tail. then he made a leap high over their heads and landed  on the other side of the table. laughing, though she didnt know why, lucy scrambled  over it to reach him. aslan leaped again. a mad chase began. round and round the hill -top he led them, now hopelessly out of their reach, now letting them almost catch his  tail, now diving between them, now tossing them in the air with his huge and  beautifully velveted paws and catching them again, and now stopping unexpectedly so that all  three of them rolled over together in a happy laughing heap of fur and arms and legs. it  was such a romp as no one has ever had except in narnia; and whether it was more like  playing with  
a thunderstorm or playing with a kitten lucy could never make up her mind.  and the funny thing was that when all three finally lay together panting in the sun  the girls no longer felt in the least tired or hungry or thirsty.
"and now," said aslan presently, "to business. i feel i am going to roar.  you had better put your fingers in your ears.”
and they did. and aslan stood up and when he opened his mouth to roar his  face became so terrible that they did not dare to look at it. and they saw all the  trees in front of him bend before the blast of his roaring as grass bends in a meadow before the  wind. then he said,  "we have a long journey to go. you must ride on me." and he crouched down  and the children climbed on to his warm, golden back, and susan sat first, holding  on tightly to his mane and lucy sat behind holding on tightly to susan. and with a great  heave he rose underneath them and then shot off, faster than any horse could go, down  hill and into the thick of the forest.
that ride was perhaps the most wonderful thing that happened to them in  narnia. have you ever had a gallop on a horse? think of that; and then take away the  heavy noise of the hoofs and the jingle of the bits and imagine instead the almost  noiseless padding of the great paws. then imagine instead of the black or grey or chestnut back  of the horse the soft roughness of golden fur, and the mane flying back in the wind. and  then imagine you are going about twice as fast as the fastest racehorse. but this is a  mount that doesnt need to be guided and never grows tired. he rushes on and on, never missing  his footing, never hesitating, threading his way with perfect skill between tree trunks,  jumping over bush and briar and the smaller streams, wading the larger, swimming the  largest of all.
and you are riding not on a road nor in a park nor even on the downs, but  right across narnia, in spring, down solemn avenues of beech and across sunny glades of  oak, through wild orchards of snow-white cherry trees, past roaring waterfalls  and mossy rocks and echoing caverns, up windy slopes alight with gorse bushes, and  across the shoulders of heathery mountains and along giddy ridges and down, down, down  again into wild valleys and out into acres of blue flowers.
it was nearly midday when they found themselves looking down a steep  hillside at a castle - a little toy castle it looked from where they stood - which seemed  to be all pointed towers. but the lion was rushing down at such a speed that it grew larger  every moment and before they had time even to ask themselves what it was they were  already on a level with it. and now it no longer looked like a toy castle but rose frowning in  front of them.
no face looked over the battlements and the gates were fast shut. and  aslan, not at all slacking his pace, rushed straight as a bullet towards it.
"the witchs home!" he cried. "now, children, hold tight.”
next moment the whole world seemed to turn upside down, and the children  felt as if they had left their insides behind them; for the lion had gathered himself  together for a  
greater leap than any he had yet made and jumped - or you may call it  flying rather than jumping - right over the castle wall. the two girls, breathless but unhurt,  found themselves tumbling off his back in the middle of a wide stone courtyard  full of statues.





CHAPTER SIXTEEN

小.说.t|xt.天+
what happened about the statues  "what an extraordinary place!" cried lucy. "all those stone animals -and  people too!
its -its like a museum.”
"hush," said susan, "aslans doing something.”
he was indeed. he had bounded up to the stone lion and breathed on him.  then without waiting a moment he whisked round - almost as if he had been a cat chasing  its tail -and breathed also on the stone dwarf, which (as you remember) was standing a  few feet from the lion with his back to it. then he pounced on a tall stone dryad which  stood beyond the dwarf, turned rapidly aside to deal with a stone rabbit on his right, and  rushed on to two centaurs. but at that moment lucy said,  "oh, susan! look! look at the lion.”
i expect youve seen someone put a lighted match to a bit of newspaper  which is propped up in a grate against an unlit fire. and for a second nothing seems to have  happened; and then you notice a tiny streak of flame creeping along the edge of the  newspaper. it was like that now. for a second after aslan had breathed upon him the stone  lion looked just the same. then a tiny streak of gold began to run along his white marble  back then it spread - then the colour seemed to lick all over him as the flame licks all  over a bit of paper - then, while his hindquarters were still obviously stone, the lion  shook his mane and all the heavy, stone folds rippled into living hair. then he opened a  great red mouth, warm and living, and gave a prodigious yawn. and now his hind legs had come  to life.
he lifted one of them and scratched himself. then, having caught sight of  aslan, he went bounding after him and frisking round him whimpering with delight and  jumping up to lick his face.
of course the childrens eyes turned to follow the lion; but the sight they  saw was so wonderful that they soon forgot about him. everywhere the statues were  coming to life.
the courtyard looked no longer like a museum; it looked more like a zoo.  creatures were running after aslan and dancing round him till he was almost hidden in the  crowd.
instead of all that deadly white the courtyard was now a blaze of colours;  glossy chestnut sides of centaurs, indigo horns of unicorns, dazzling plumage of birds,  reddy-brown of foxes, dogs and satyrs, yellow stockings and crimson hoods of dwarfs; and  the birch-girls in silver, and the beech-girls in fresh, transparent green, and the larch- girls in green so  
bright that it was almost yellow. and instead of the deadly silence the  whole place rang with the sound of happy roarings, brayings, yelpings, barkings, squealings,  cooings, neighings, stampings, shouts, hurrahs, songs and laughter.
"oh!" said susan in a different tone. "look! i wonder - i mean, is it  safe?”
lucy looked and saw that aslan had just breathed on the feet of the stone  giant.
"its all right!" shouted aslan joyously. "once the feet are put right, all  the rest of him will follow.”
"that wasnt exactly what i meant," whispered susan to lucy. but it was too  late to do anything about it now even if aslan would have listened to her. the change  was already creeping up the giants legs. now he was moving his feet. a moment later he  lifted his club off his shoulder, rubbed his eyes and said,  "bless me! i must have been asleep. now! wheres that dratted little witch  that was running about on the ground. somewhere just by my feet it was." but when  everyone had shouted up to him to explain what had really happened, and when the giant  had put his hand to his ear and got them to repeat it all again so that at last he  understood, then he bowed down till his head was no further off than the top of a haystack and  touched his cap repeatedly to aslan, beaming all over his honest ugly face. (giants of  any sort are now so rare in england and so few giants are good-tempered that ten to one  you have never seen a giant when his face is beaming. its a sight well worth  looking at.)  "now for the inside of this house!" said aslan. "look alive, everyone. up  stairs and down stairs and in my ladys chamber! leave no corner unsearched. you never  know where some poor prisoner may be concealed.”
and into the interior they all rushed and for several minutes the whole of  that dark, horrible, fusty old castle echoed with the opening of windows and with  everyones voices crying out at once, "dont forget the dungeons - give us a hand with this  door! heres another little winding stair - oh! i say. heres a poor kangaroo. call  aslan - phew! how it smells in here - look out for trap-doors - up here! there are a whole  lot more on the landing!" but the best of all was when lucy came rushing upstairs shouting  out,  "aslan! aslan! ive found mr tumnus. oh, do come quick.”
a moment later lucy and the little faun were holding each other by both  hands and dancing round and round for joy. the little chap was none the worse for  having been a statue and was of course very interested in all she had to tell him.
but at last the ransacking of the witchs fortress was ended. the whole  castle stood empty with every door and window open and the light and the sweet spring  air flooding into all the dark and evil places which needed them so badly. the whole  crowd of  
liberated statues surged back into the courtyard. and it was then that  someone (tumnus, i think) first said,  "but how are we going to get out?" for aslan had got in by a jump and the  gates were still locked.
"thatll be all right," said aslan; and then, rising on his hind-legs, he  bawled up at the giant. "hi! you up there," he roared. "whats your name?”
"giant rumblebuffin, if it please your honour," said the giant, once more  touching his cap.
"well then, giant rumblebuffin," said aslan, "just let us out of this, will  you?”
"certainly, your honour. it will be a pleasure," said giant rumblebuffin.  "stand well away from the gates, all you little uns." then he strode to the gate  himself and bang - bang - bang - went his huge club. the gates creaked at the first blow,  cracked at the second, and shivered at the third. then he tackled the towers on each side  of them and after a few minutes of crashing and thudding both the towers and a good bit  of the wall on each side went thundering down in a mass of hopeless rubble; and when  the dust cleared it was odd, standing in that dry, grim, stony yard, to see through  the gap all the grass and waving trees and sparkling streams of the forest, and the blue  hills beyond that and beyond them the sky.
"blowed if i aint all in a muck sweat," said the giant, puffing like the  largest railway engine. "comes of being out of condition. i suppose neither of you young  ladies has such a thing as a pocket-handkerchee about you?”
"yes, i have," said lucy, standing on tip-toes and holding her handkerchief  up as far as she could reach.
"thank you, missie," said giant rumblebuffin, stooping down. next moment  lucy got rather a fright for she found herself caught up in mid-air between the  giants finger and thumb. but just as she was getting near his face he suddenly started and  then put her gently back on the ground muttering, "bless me! ive picked up the little  girl instead. i beg your pardon, missie, i thought you was the handkerchee!”
"no, no," said lucy laughing, "here it is!" this time he managed to get it  but it was only about the same size to him that a saccharine tablet would be to you, so  that when she saw him solemnly rubbing it to and fro across his great red face, she said,  "im afraid its not much use to you, mr rumblebuffin.”
"not at all. not at all," said the giant politely. "never met a nicer  handkerchee. so fine, so handy. so - i dont know how to describe it.”
"what a nice giant he is!" said lucy to mr tumnus.
"oh yes," replied the faun. "all the buffins always were. one of the most  respected of all the giant families in narnia. not very clever, perhaps (i never knew a  giant that was), but an old family. with traditions, you know. if hed been the other sort  shed never have turned him into stone.”
at this point aslan clapped his paws together and called for silence.
"our days work is not yet over," he said, "and if the witch is to be  finally defeated before bed-time we must find the battle at once.”
"and join in, i hope, sir!" added the largest of the centaurs.
"of course," said aslan. "and now! those who cant keep up - that is,  children, dwarfs, and small animals - must ride on the backs of those who can - that is,  lions, centaurs, unicorns, horses, giants and eagles. those who are good with their noses  must come in front with us lions to smell out where the battle is. look lively and sort  yourselves.”
and with a great deal of bustle and cheering they did. the most pleased of  the lot was the other lion who kept running about everywhere pretending to be very busy but  really in order to say to everyone he met. "did you hear what he said? us lions. that  means him and me. us lions. thats what i like about aslan. no side, no stand-off- ishness. us lions. that meant him and me." at least he went on saying this till aslan  had loaded him up with three dwarfs, one dryad, two rabbits, and a hedgehog. that steadied  him a bit.
when all were ready (it was a big sheep-dog who actually helped aslan most  in getting them sorted into their proper order) they set out through the gap in the  castle wall. at first the lions and dogs went nosing about in all directions. but then suddenly  one great hound picked up the scent and gave a bay. there was no time lost after that. soon  all the dogs and lions and wolves and other hunting animals were going at full speed  with their noses to the ground, and all the others, streaked out for about half a mile  behind them, were following as fast as they could. the noise was like an english fox-hunt  only better because every now and then with the music of the hounds was mixed the roar  of the other lion and sometimes the far deeper and more awful roar of aslan himself.  faster and faster they went as the scent became easier and easier to follow. and then, just  as they came to the last curve in a narrow, winding valley, lucy heard above all these  noises another noise - a different one, which gave her a queer feeling inside. it was a  noise of shouts and shrieks and of the clashing of metal against metal.
then they came out of the narrow valley and at once she saw the reason.  there stood peter and edmund and all the rest of aslans army fighting desperately  against the crowd of horrible creatures whom she had seen last night; only now, in the  daylight, they looked even stranger and more evil and more deformed. there also seemed to be far  more of them. peters army - which had their backs to her looked terribly few. and  there werestatues dotted all over the battlefield, so apparently the witch had  been using her wand. but she did not seem to be using it now. she was fighting with her  stone knife. it  
was peter she was fightin - both of them going at it so hard that lucy  could hardly make out what was happening; she only saw the stone knife and peters sword  flashing so quickly that they looked like three knives and three swords. that pair were  in the centre.
on each side the line stretched out. horrible things were happening  wherever she looked.
"off my back, children," shouted aslan. and they both tumbled off. then  with a roar that shook all narnia from the western lamp-post to the shores of the eastern  sea the great beast flung himself upon the white witch. lucy saw her face lifted towards  him for one second with an expression of terror and amazement. then lion and witch had  rolled over together but with the witch underneath; and at the same moment all war-like  creatures whom aslan had led from the witchs house rushed madly on the enemy lines,  dwarfs with their battleaxes, dogs with teeth, the giant with his club (and his  feet also crushed dozens of the foe), unicorns with their horns, centaurs with swords and  hoofs. and peters tired army cheered, and the newcomers roared, and the enemy squealed and  gibbered till the wood re-echoed with the din of that onset.

 www.xiabook.com 



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

　下 /书 /网　  　
the hunting of the white stag  the battle was all over a few minutes after their arrival. most of the  enemy had been killed in the first charge of aslan and his -companions; and when those who  were still living saw that the witch was dead they either gave themselves up or took  to flight. the next thing that lucy knew was that peter and aslan were shaking hands. it  was strange to her to see peter looking as he looked now - his face was so pale and stern  and he seemed so much older.
"it was all edmunds doing, aslan," peter was saying. "wed have been  beaten if it hadnt been for him. the witch was turning our troops into stone right and left.  but nothing would stop him. he fought his way through three ogres to where she was just  turning one of your leopards into a statue. and when he reached her he had sense to  bring his sword smashing down on her wand instead of trying to go for her directly and  simply getting made a statue himself for his pains. that was the mistake all the rest were  making. once her wand was broken we began to have some chance - if we hadnt lost so  many already.
he was terribly wounded. we must go and see him.”
they found edmund in charge of mrs beaver a little way back from the  fighting line. he was covered with blood, his mouth was open, and his face a nasty green  colour.
"quick, lucy," said aslan.
and then, almost for the first time, lucy remembered the precious cordial  that had been given her for a christmas present. her hands trembled so much that she  could hardly  
undo the stopper, but she managed it in the end and poured a few drops into  her brothers mouth.
"there are other people wounded," said aslan while she was still looking  eagerly into edmunds pale face and wondering if the cordial would have any result.
"yes, i know," said lucy crossly. "wait a minute.”
"daughter of eve," said aslan in a graver voice, "others also are at the  point of death.
must more people die for edmund?”
"im sorry, aslan," said lucy, getting up and going with him. and for the  next half-hour they were busy - she attending to the wounded while he restored those who  had been turned into stone. when at last she was free to come back to edmund she  found him standing on his feet and not only healed of his wounds but looking better  than she had seen him look - oh, for ages; in fact ever since his first term at that  horrid school which was where he had begun to go wrong. he had become his real old self again  and could look you in the face. and there on the field of battle aslan made him a  knight.
"does he know," whispered lucy to susan, "what aslan did for him? does he  know what the arrangement with the witch really was?”
"hush! no. of course not," said susan.
"oughtnt he to be told?" said lucy.
"oh, surely not," said susan. "it would be too awful for him. think how  youd feel if you were he.”
"all the same i think he ought to know," said lucy. but at that moment they  were interrupted.
that night they slept where they were. how aslan provided food for them all  i dont know; but somehow or other they found themselves all sitting down on the  grass to a fine high tea at about eight oclock. next day they began marching eastward down  the side of the great river. and the next day after that, at about teatime, they  actually reached the mouth. the castle of cair paravel on its little hill towered up above them;  before them were the sands, with rocks and little pools of salt water, and seaweed, and  the smell of the sea and long miles of bluish-green waves breaking for ever and ever on the  beach. and oh, the cry of the sea-gulls! have you heard it? can you remember?
that evening after tea the four children all managed to get down to the  beach again and get their shoes and stockings off and feel the sand between their toes. but  next day was more solemn. for then, in the great hall of cair paravel - that wonderful  hall with the ivory roof and the west wall hung with peacocks feathers and the eastern  door which looks towards the sea, in the presence of all their friends and to the  sound of trumpets,  
aslan solemnly crowned them and led them to the four thrones amid deafening  shouts of, "long live king peter! long live queen susan! long live king edmund! long  live queen lucy!”
"once a king or queen in narnia, always a king or queen. bear it well, sons  of adam!
bear it well, daughters of eve!" said aslan.
and through the eastern door, which was wide open, came the voices of the  mermen and the mermaids swimming close to the shore and singing in honour of their new  kings and queens.
so the children sat on their thrones and sceptres were put into their hands  and they gave rewards and honours to all their friends, to tumnus the faun, and to the  beavers, and giant rumblebuffin, to the leopards, and the good centaurs, and the good  dwarfs, and to the lion. and that night there was a great feast in cair paravel, and  revelry and dancing, and gold flashed and wine flowed, and answering to the music inside, but  stranger, sweeter, and more piercing, came the music of the sea people.
but amidst all these rejoicings aslan himself quietly slipped away. and  when the kings and queens noticed that he wasnt there they said nothing about it. for mr  beaver had warned them, "hell be coming and going," he had said. "one day youll see  him and another you wont. he doesnt like being tied down and of course he has  other countries to attend to. its quite all right. hell often drop in. only you mustnt  press him. hes wild, you know. not like a tame lion.”
and now, as you see, this story is nearly (but not quite) at an end. these  two kings and two queens governed narnia well, and long and happy was their reign. at  first much of their time was spent in seeking out the remnants of the white witchs army  and destroying them, and indeed for a long time there would be news of evil  things lurking in the wilder parts of the forest - a haunting here and a killing there, a  glimpse of a werewolf one month and a rumour of a hag the next. but in the end all that foul  brood was stamped out. and they made good laws and kept the peace and saved good trees from  being unnecessarily cut down, and liberated young dwarfs and young satyrs from  being sent to school, and generally stopped busybodies and interferers and encouraged  ordinary people who wanted to live and let live. and they drove back the fierce giants  (quite a different sort from giant rumblebuffin) on the north of narnia when these ventured  across the frontier. and they entered into friendship and alliance with countries  beyond the sea and paid them visits of state and received visits of state from them. and they  themselves grew and changed as the years passed over them. and peter became a tall and  deep-chested man and a great warrior, and he was called king peter the magnificent. and  susan grew into a tall and gracious woman with black hair that fell almost to her feet  and the kings of the countries beyond the sea began to send ambassadors asking for her hand  in marriage.
and she was called susan the gentle. edmund was a graver and quieter man  than peter, and great in council and judgement. he was called king edmund the just. but  as for lucy, she was always gay and golden-haired, and all princes in those parts  desired her to be their queen, and her own people called her queen lucy the valiant.
so they lived in great joy and if ever they remembered their life in this  world it was only as one remembers a dream. and one year it fell out that tumnus (who was a  middle-aged faun by now and beginning to be stout) came down river and brought them  news that the white stag had once more appeared in his parts - the white stag who would  give you wishes if you caught him. so these two kings and two queens with the  principal members of their court, rode a-hunting with horns and hounds in the western  woods to follow the white stag. and they had not hunted long before they had a sight  of him. and he led them a great pace over rough and smooth and through thick and thin,  till the horses of all the courtiers were tired out and these four were still following.  and they saw the stag enter into a thicket where their horses could not follow. then said  king peter (for they talked in quite a different style now, having been kings and queens  for so long), "fair consorts, let us now alight from our horses and follow this beast  into the thicket; for in all my days i never hunted a nobler quarry.”
"sir," said the others, "even so let us do.”
so they alighted and tied their horses to trees and went on into the thick  wood on foot.
and as soon as they had entered it queen susan said,  "fair friends, here is a great marvel, for i seem to see a tree of iron.”
"madam," said,king edmund, "if you look well upon it you shall see it is a  pillar of iron with a lantern set on the top thereof.”
"by the lions mane, a strange device," said king peter, "to set a lantern  here where the trees cluster so thick about it and so high above it that if it were lit it  should give light to no man!”
"sir," said queen lucy. "by likelihood when this post and this lamp were  set here there were smaller trees in the place, or fewer, or none. for this is a young  wood and the iron post is old." and they stood looking upon it. then said king edmund,  "i know not how it is, but this lamp on the post worketh upon me strangely.  it runs in my mind that i have seen the like before; as it were in a dream, or in the  dream of a dream.”
"sir," answered they all, "it is even so with us also.”
"and more," said queen lucy, "for it will not go out of my mind that if we  pass this post and lantern either we shall find strange adventures or else some great  change of our fortunes.”
"madam," said king edmund, "the like foreboding stirreth in my heart also.”
"and in mine, fair brother," said king peter.
"and in mine too," said queen susan. "wherefore by my counsel we shall  lightly return to our horses and follow this white stag no further.”
"madam," said king peter, "therein i pray thee to have me excused. for  never since we four were kings and queens in narnia have we set our hands to any high  matter, as battles, quests, feats of arms, acts of justice, and the like, and then  given over; but always what we have taken in hand, the same we have achieved.”
"sister," said queen lucy, "my royal brother speaks rightly. and it seems  to me we should be shamed if for any fearing or foreboding we turned back from  following so noble a beast as now we have in chase.”
"and so say i," said king edmund. "and i have such desire to find the  signification of this thing that i would not by my good will turn back for the richest jewel  in all narnia and all the islands.”
"then in the name of aslan," said queen susan, "if ye will all have it so,  let us go on and take the adventure that shall fall to us.”
so these kings and queens entered the thicket, and before they had gone a  score of paces they all remembered that the thing they had seen was called a lamppost, and  before they had gone twenty more they noticed that they were. making their way not  through branches but through coats. and next moment they all came tumbling out of a  wardrobe door into the empty room, and they were no longer kings and queens in their  hunting array but just peter, susan, edmund and lucy in their old clothes. it was  the same day and the same hour of the day on which they had all gone into the wardrobe  to hide. mrs macready and the visitors were still talking in the passage; but luckily  they never came into the empty room and so the children werent caught.
and that would have been the very end of the story if it hadnt been that  they felt they really must explain to the professor why four of the coats out of his  wardrobe were missing. and the professor, who was a very remarkable man, didnt tell them  not to be silly or not to tell lies, but believed the whole story. "no," he said, "i  dont think it will be any good trying to go back through the wardrobe door to get the coats. you  wont get into narnia again by that route. nor would the coats be much use by now if you did!
eh? whats that? yes, of course youll get back to narnia again some day. once a king in narnia, always a king in narnia. but dont go trying to use the same route twice.
indeed, dont try to get there at all. itll happen when youre not looking for it. and dont talk too much about it even among yourselves. and dont mention it to anyone else unless you find that theyve had adventures of the same sort themselves. whats that? how will you know? oh, youll know all right. odd things they say - even their looks - will let the secret out. keep your  
eyes open. bless me, what do they teach them at these schools?
and that is the very end of the adventure of the wardrobe.
but if the professor was right it was only the beginning of the adventures of narnia.

 

 