《为奴十二年》查看《为奴十二年》书评和最新更新以及相关书籍推荐请到《为奴十二年》专题网址http:///waiguo/9815/ 
  



第1章 EDITOR’S PREFACE


　　when the editor commenced the preparation of thefollowing narrative， he did not suppose it would reachthe size of this volume. in order， however， to present allthe facts which have been communicated to him， it hasseemed necessary to extend it to its present length.
　　many of the statements contained in the followingpages are corroborated by abundant evidence—othersrest entirely upon solomon’s assertion. that he hasadhered strictly to the truth the editor， at least， who hashad an opportunity of detecting any contradiction ordiscrepancy in his statements， is well satisfied. he hasinvariably repeated the same story without deviating inthe slightest particular， and has also carefully perused themanuscript， dictating an alteration wherever the mosttrivial inaccuracy has appealed.
　　it was solomon’s fortune， during his captivity， to beowned by several masters. the treatment he receivedwhile at the “pine woods” shows that among slaveholdersthere are men of humanity as well of cruelty. some ofthem are spoken of with emotions of gratitude—othersin a spirit of bitterness. it is believed that the following001
　　account of his experience on bayou boeuf presents acorrect picture of slavery in all its lights， and shadows， asit now exists in that locality. unbiased， as he conceives，by any prepossessions or prejudices， the only object ofthe editor has been to give a faithful history of solomonnorthup’s life， as he received it from his lips.
　　in the accomplishment of that object， he trusts he hassucceeded， notwithstanding the numerous faults of styleand of expression it may be found to contain.
　　david wilson.
　　whitehall， n. y.， may， 1853.




第2章 Chapter I.(1)


　　having been born a freeman， and for more than thirtyyears enjoyed the blessings of liberty in a free state—andhaving at the end of that time been kidnapped and soldinto slavery， where i remained， until happily rescued inthe month of january， 1853， after a bondage of twelveyears—it has been suggested that an account of my lifeand fortunes would not be uninteresting to the public.
　　since my return to liberty， i have not failed to perceivethe increasing interest throughout the northern states，in regard to the subject of slavery. works of fiction，professing to portray its features in their more pleasingas well as more repugnant aspects， have been circulatedto an extent unprecedented， and， as i understand， havecreated a fruitful topic of comment and discussion.
　　i can speak of slavery only so far as it came undermy own observation—only so far as i have known andexperienced it in my own person. my object is， to give acandid and truthful statement of facts： to repeat the storyof my life， without exaggeration， leaving it for others todetermine， whether even the pages of fiction present apicture of more cruel wrong or a severer bondage.
　　as far back as i have been able to ascertain， myancestors on the paternal side were slaves in rhode island.
　　they belonged to a family by the name of northup， oneof whom， removing to the state of new york， settledat hoosic， in rensselaer county. he brought withhim mintus northup， my father. on the death of thisgentleman， which must have occurred some fifty yearsago， my father became free， having been emancipated bya direction in his will.
　　henry b. northup， esq.， of sandy hill， a distinguishedcounselor at law， and the man to whom， under
　　providence， i am indebted for my present liberty， and myreturn to the society of my wife and children， is a relativeof the family in which my forefathers were thus held toservice， and from which they took the name i bear. tothis fact may be attributed the persevering interest he hastaken in my behalf.
　　sometime after my father’s liberation， he removed tothe town of minerva， essex county， n. y.， where i wasborn， in the month of july， 1808. how long he remainedin the latter place i have not the means of definitelyascertaining. from thence he removed to granville，washington county， near a place known as slyborough，where， for some years， he labored on the farm of clarknorthup， also a relative of his old master； from thencehe removed to the alden farm， at moss street， a shortdistance north of the village of sandy hill； and fromthence to the farm now owned by russel pratt， situatedon the road leading from fort edward to argyle， where hecontinued to reside until his death， which took place on003
　　the 22d day of november， 1829. he left a widow and twochildren—myself， and joseph， an elder brother. the latteris still living in the county of oswego， near the city of thatname； my mother died during the period of my captivity.
　　though born a slave， and laboring under the disadvantages to which my unfortunate race is subjected，my father was a man respected for his industry andintegrity， as many now living， who well remember him， areready to testify. his whole life was passed in the peacefulpursuits of agriculture， never seeking employment inthose more menial positions， which seem to be especiallyallotted to the children of africa. besides giving us aneducation surpassing that ordinarily bestowed uponchildren in our condition， he acquired， by his diligenceand economy， a sufficient property qualification to entitlehim to the right of suffrage. he was accustomed to speakto us of his early life； and although at all times cherishingthe warmest emotions of kindness， and even of affectiontowards the family， in whose house he had been abondsman， he nevertheless comprehended the systemof slavery， and dwelt with sorrow on the degradationof his race. he endeavored to imbue our minds withsentiments of morality， and to teach us to place our， trustand confidence in him who regards the humblest as wellas the highest of his creatures. how often since that timehas the recollection of his paternal counsels occurred tome， while lying in a slave hut in the distant and sicklyregions of louisiana， smarting with the undeserved wounds which an inhuman master had inflicted， andlonging only for the grave which had covered him， toshield me also from the lash of the oppressor. in thechurch-yard at sandy hill， an humble stone marks thespot where he reposes， after having worthily performedthe duties appertaining to the lowly sphere wherein godhad appointed him to walk.
　　up to this period i had been principally engaged withmy father in the labors of the farm. the leisure hoursallowed me were generally either employed over mybooks， or playing on the violin—an amusement whichwas the ruling passion of my youth. it has also been thesource of consolation since， affording， pleasure to thesimple beings with whom my lot was cast， and beguilingmy own thoughts， for many hours， from the painfulcontemplation of my fate.
　　on christmas day， 1829， i was married to annehampton， a colored girl then living in the vicinity of ourresidence. the ceremony was performed at fort edward，by timothy eddy， esq.， a magistrate of that town， andstill a prominent citizen of the place. she had resided along time at sandy hill， with mr. baird， proprietor of theeagle tavern， and also in the family of rev. alexanderproudfit， of salem. this gentleman for many years hadpresided over the presbyterian society at the latter place，and was widely distinguished for his learning and piety.
　　anne still holds in grateful remembrance the exceedingkindness and the excellent counsels of that good man. she is not able to determine the exact line of her descent， butthe blood of three races mingles in her veins. it is difficultto tell whether the red， white， or black predominates.
www、mdwenxue.com



第3章 Chapter I.(2)


　　the union of them all， however， in her origin， has givenher a singular but pleasing expression， such as is rarelyto be seen. though somewhat resembling， yet she cannotproperly be styled a quadroon， a class to which， i haveomitted to mention， my mother belonged.
　　i had just now passed the period of my minority，having reached the age of twenty-one years in themonth of july previous. deprived of the advice andassistance of my father， with a wife dependent upon mefor support， i resolved to enter upon a life of industry；and notwithstanding the obstacle of color， and theconsciousness of my lowly state， indulged in pleasantdreams of a good time coming， when the possession ofsome humble habitation， with a few surrounding acres，should reward my labors， and bring me the means ofhappiness and comfort.
　　from the time of my marriage to this day the love ihave borne my wife has been sincere and unabated； andonly those who have felt the glowing tenderness a fathercherishes for his offspring， can appreciate my affectionfor the beloved children which have since been born to us.
　　this much i deem appropriate and necessary to day， inorder that those who read these pages， may comprehendthe poignancy of those sufferings i have been doomed tobear.
　　immediately upon our marriage we commenced house-keeping， in the old yellow building then standing atthe southern extremity of fort edward village， and whichhas since been transformed into a modern mansion， andlately occupied by captain lathrop. it is known as thefort house. in this building the courts were sometimeheld after the organization of the county. it was alsooccupied by burgoyne in 1777， being situated near the oldfort on the left bank of the hudson.
　　during the winter i was employed with others repairing the champlain canal， on that section overwhich william van nortwick was superintendent. davidmceachron had the immediate charge of the men inwhose company i labored. by the time the canal openedin the spring， i was enabled， from the savings of mywages， to purchase a pair of horses， and other thingsnecessarily required in the business of navigation.
　　having hired several efficient hands to assist me， ientered into contracts for the transportation of large raftsof timber from lake champlain to troy. dyer beckwithand a mr. bartemy， of whitehall， accompanied me onseveral trips. during the season i became perfectly familiarwith the art and mysteries of rafting—a knowledge whichafterwards enabled me to render profitable service toa worthy master， and to astonish the simple-wittedlumbermen on the banks of the bayou boeuf.
　　in one of my voyages down lake champlain， i wasinduced to make a visit to canada. repairing to montreal，i visited the cathedral and other places of interest in thatcity， from whence i continued my excursion to kingstonand other towns， obtaining a knowledge of localities，which was also of service to me afterwards， as will appeartowards the close of this narrative.
　　having completed my contracts on the canal satisfactorilyto myself and to my employer， and not wishing to remainidle， now that the navigation of the canal was againsuspended， i entered into another contract with medadgunn， to cut a large quantity of wood. in this business iwas engaged during the winter of 1831-32.
　　with the return of spring， anne and myself conceivedthe project of taking a farm in the neighborhood. i hadbeen accustomed from earliest youth to agriculturallabors， and it was an occupation congenial to my tastes.
　　i accordingly entered into arrangements for a partof the old alden farm， on which my father formerlyresided. with one cow， one swine， a yoke of fine oxen ihad lately purchased of lewis brown， in hartford， andother personal property and effects， we proceeded to ournew home in kingsbury. that year i planted twenty-fiveacres of corn， sowed large fields of oats， and commencedfarming upon as large a scale as my utmost means wouldpermit. anne was diligent about the house affairs， while itoiled laboriously in the field.
　　on this place we continued to reside until 1834. in thewinter season i had numerous calls to play on the violin.
　　wherever the young people assembled to dance， i was almost invariably there. throughout the surroundingvillages my fiddle was notorious. anne， also， duringher long residence at the eagle tavern， had becomesomewhat famous as a cook. during court weeks， and onpublic occasions， she was employed at high wages in thekitchen at sherrill’s coffee house.




第4章 Chapter I.(3)


　　we always returned home from the performance ofthese services with money in our pockets； so that， withfiddling， cooking， and farming， we soon found ourselvesin the possession of abundance， and， in fact leading ahappy and prosperous life. well， indeed， would it havebeen for us had we remained on the farm at kingsbury；but the time came when the next step was to be takentowards the cruel destiny that awaited me.
　　in march， 1834， we removed to saratoga springs. weoccupied a house belonging to daniel o’brien， on thenorth side of washington street. at that time isaac taylorkept a large boarding house， known as washington hall，at the north end of broadway. he employed me to drive ahack， in which capacity i worked for him two years. afterthis time i was generally employed through the visitingseason， as also was anne， in the united states hotel，and other public houses of the place. in winter seasons irelied upon my violin， though during the construction ofthe troy and saratoga railroad， i performed many harddays’ labor upon it.
　　i was in the habit， at saratoga， of purchasing articlesnecessary for my family at the stores of mr. cephasparker and mr. william perry， gentlemen towardswhom， for many acts of kindness， i entertained feelingsof strong regard. it was for this reason that， twelveyears afterwards， i caused to be directed to them theletter， which is hereinafter inserted， and which was themeans， in the hands of mr. northup， of my fortunatedeliverance.
　　while living at the united states hotel， i frequentlymet with slaves， who had accompanied their mastersfrom the south. they were always well dressed and wellprovided for， leading apparently an easy life， with butfew of its ordinary troubles to perplex them. many timesthey entered into conversation with me on the subject ofslavery. almost uniformly i found they cherished a secretdesire for liberty. some of them expressed the mostardent anxiety to escape， and consulted me on the bestmethod of effecting it. the fear of punishment， however，which they knew was certain to attend their re-captureand return， in all cases proved sufficient to deter themfrom the experiment. having all my life breathed the freeair of the north， and conscious that i possessed the samefeelings and affections that find a place in the white man’sbreast； conscious， moreover， of an intelligence equal tothat of some men， at least， with a fairer skin， i was tooignorant， perhaps too independent， to conceive how anyone could be content to live in the abject condition of aslave. i could not comprehend the justice of that law， orthat religion， which upholds or recognizes the principle of slavery； and never once， i am proud to say， did ifail to counsel any one who came to me， to watch hisopportunity， and strike for freedom.
　　i continued to reside at saratoga until the spring of1841. the flattering anticipations which， seven yearsbefore， had seduced us from the quiet farm-house， onthe east side of the hudson， had not been realized.
　　though always in comfortable circumstances， we hadnot prospered. the society and associations at thatworld-renowned watering place， were not calculated topreserve the simple habits of industry and economy towhich i had been accustomed， but， on the contrary， tosubstitute others in their stead， tending to shiftlessnessand extravagance.
　　at this time we were the parents of three children—elizabeth， margaret， and alonzo. elizabeth， the eldest，was in her tenth year； margaret was two years younger，and little alonzo had just passed his fifth birth-day. theyfilled our house with gladness. their young voices weremusic in our ears. many an airy castle did their motherand myself build for the little innocents. when not atlabor i was always walking with them， clad in their bestattire， through the streets and groves of saratoga. theirpresence was my delight； and i clasped them to mybosom with as warm and tender love as if their cloudedskins had been as white as snow.
　　thus far the history of my life presents nothing whateverunusual—nothing but the common hopes， and loves，and labors of an obscure colored man， making hishumble progress in the world. but now i had reached aturning point in my existence—reached the threshold ofunutterable wrong， and sorrow， and despair. now had iapproached within the shadow of the cloud， into the thickdarkness whereof i was soon to disappear， thenceforwardto be hidden from the eyes of all my kindred， and shutout from the sweet light of liberty， for many a weary year.




第5章 Chapter II.(1)


　　one morning， towards the latter part of the month ofmarch， 1841， having at that time no particular businessto engage my attention， i was walking about the villageof saratoga springs， thinking to myself where i mightobtain some present employment， until the busy seasonshould arrive. anne， as was her usual custom， had goneover to sandy hill， a distance of some twenty miles， totake charge of the culinary department at sherrill’s coffeehouse， during the session of the court. elizabeth， i think，had accompanied her. margaret and alonzo were withtheir aunt at saratoga.
　　on the corner of congress street and broadway， nearthe tavern， then， and for aught i know to the contrary，still kept by mr. moon， i was met by two gentlemen ofrespectable appearance， both of whom were entirelyunknown to me. i have the impression that they wereintroduced to me by some one of my acquaintances， butwho， i have in vain endeavored to recall， with the remarkthat i was an expert player on the violin.
　　at any rate， they immediately entered into conversationon that subject， making numerous inquiries touchingmy proficiency in that respect. my responses being to allappearances satisfactory， they proposed to engage my services for a short period， stating， at the same time， iwas just such a person as their business required. theirnames， as they afterwards gave them to me， were merrillbrown and abram hamilton， though whether thesewere their true appellations， i have strong reasons todoubt. the former was a man apparently forty years ofage， somewhat short and thick-set， with a countenanceindicating shrewdness and intelligence. he wore a blackfrock coat and black hat， and said he resided either atrochester or at syracuse. the latter was a young manof fair complexion and light eyes， and， i should judge，had not passed the age of twenty-five. he was tall andslender， dressed in a snuff-colored coat， with glossy hat，and vest of elegant pattern. his whole apparel was inthe extreme of fashion. his appearance was somewhateffeminate， but prepossessing and there was about himan easy air， that showed he had mingled with the world.
　　they were connected， as they informed me， with a circuscompany， then in the city of washington； that they wereon their way thither to rejoin it， having left it for a shorttime to make an excursion northward， for the purposeof seeing the country， and were paying their expenses byan occasional exhibition. they also remarked that theyhad found much difficulty in procuring music for theirentertainments， and that if i would accompany them asfar as new-york， they would give me one dollar for eachday’s services， and three dollars in addition for everynight i played at their performances， besides sufficient to pay the expenses of my return from new-york to saratoga.
　　i at once accepted the tempting offer， both for thereward it promised， and from a desire to visit themetropolis. they were anxious to leave immediately.
　　thinking my absence would be brief， i did not deem itnecessary to write to anne whither i had gone； in factsupposing that my return， perhaps， would be as soon ashers. so taking a change of linen and my violin， i was readyto depart. the carriage was brought round—a coveredone， drawn by a pair of noble bays， altogether forming anelegant establishment. their baggage， consisting of threelarge trunks， was fastened on the rack， and mounting tothe driver’s seat， while they took their places in the rear，i drove away from saratoga on the road to albany， elatedwith my new position， and happy as i had ever been， onany day in all my life.
　　we passed through ballston， and striking the ridgeroad， as it is called， if my memory correctly serves me，followed it direct to albany. we reached that city beforedark， and stopped at a hotel southward from the museum.
　　this night i had an opportunity of witnessing oneof their performances—the only one， during the wholeperiod i was with them. hamilton was stationed at thedoor； i formed the orchestra， while brown provided theentertainment. it consisted in throwing balls， dancingon the rope， frying pancakes in a hat， causing invisiblepigs to squeal， and other like feats of ventriloquism andlegerdemain. the audience was extraordinarily sparse，and not of the selectest character at that， and hamilton’sreport of the proceeds but a “beggarly account of emptyboxes.”
　　early next morning we renewed our journey. theburden of their conversation now was the expression ofan anxiety to reach the circus without delay. they hurriedforward， without again stopping to exhibit， and in duecourse of time， we reached new-york， taking lodgings ata house on the west side of the city， in a street runningfrom broadway to the river. i supposed my journey was atan end， and expected in a day or two at least， to return tomy friends and family at saratoga. brown and hamilton，however， began to importune me to continue with themto washington. they alleged that immediately on theirarrival， now that the summer season was approaching，the circus would set out for the north. they promised mea situation and high wages if i would accompany them.
　　largely did they expatiate on the advantages that wouldresult to me， and such were the flattering representationsthey made， that i finally concluded to accept the offer.
　　the next morning they suggested that， inasmuch as wewere about entering a slave state， it would be well， beforeleaving new-york， to procure free papers. the idea struckme as a prudent one， though i think it would scarcelyhave occurred to me， had they not proposed it. weproceeded at once to what i understood to be the customhouse. they made oath to certain facts showing i was afree man. a paper was drawn up and handed us， with the direction to take it to the clerk’s office. we did so， and theclerk having added something to it， for which he was paidsix shillings， we returned again to the custom house.
  www.7wenxue.com



第6章 Chapter II.(2)


　　some further formalities were gone through with beforeit was completed， when， paying the officer two dollars，i placed the papers in my pocket， and started with mytwo friends to our hotel. i thought at the time， i mustconfess， that the papers were scarcely worth the costof obtaining them—the apprehension of danger to mypersonal safety never having suggested itself to me in theremotest manner. the clerk， to whom we were directed， iremember， made a memorandum in a large book， which，i presume， is in the office yet. a reference to the entriesduring the latter part of march， or first of april， 1841， ihave no doubt will satisfy the incredulous， at least so faras this particular transaction is concerned.
　　with the evidence of freedom in my possession， thenext day after our arrival in new-york， we crossed theferry to jersey city， and took the road to philadelphia.
　　here we remained one night， continuing our journeytowards baltimore early in the morning. in due time， wearrived in the latter city， and stopped at a hotel near therailroad depot， either kept by a mr. rathbone， or knownas the rathbone house. all the way from new-york，their anxiety to reach the circus seemed to grow moreand more intense. we left the carriage at baltimore， andentering the cars， proceeded to washington， at whichplace we arrived just at nightfall， the evening previous to the funeral of general harrison， and stopped at gadsby’shotel， on pennsylvania avenue.
　　after supper they called me to their apartments，and paid me forty-three dollars， a sum greater thanmy wages amounted to， which act of generosity was inconsequence， they said， of their not having exhibitedas often as they had given me to anticipate， during ourtrip from saratoga. they moreover informed me that ithad been the intention of the circus company to leavewashington the next morning， but that on account of thefuneral， they had concluded to remain another day. theywere then， as they had been from the time of our firstmeeting， extremely kind. no opportunity was omittedof addressing me in the language of approbation； while，on the other hand， i was certainly much prepossessed intheir favor. i gave them my confidence without reserve，and would freely have trusted them to almost any extent.
　　their constant conversation and manner towards me—their foresight in suggesting the idea of free papers， anda hundred other little acts， unnecessary to be repeated—all indicated that they were friends indeed， sincerelysolicitous for my welfare. i know not but they were. iknow not but they were innocent of the great wickednessof which i now believe them guilty. whether they wereaccessory to my misfortunes—subtle and inhumanmonsters in the shape of men—designedly luring me awayfrom home and family， and liberty， for the sake of gold—those who read these pages will have the same means of determining as myself. if they were innocent， my suddendisappearance must have been unaccountable indeed；but revolving in my mind all the attending circumstances，i never yet could indulge， towards them， so charitable asupposition.
　　after receiving the money from them， of which theyappeared to have an abundance， they advised me notto go into the streets that night， inasmuch as i wasunacquainted with the customs of the city. promising toremember their advice， i left them together， and soonafter was shown by a colored servant to a sleeping roomin the back part of the hotel， on the ground floor. i laiddown to rest， thinking of home and wife， and children，and the long distance that stretched between us， until ifell asleep. but no good angel of pity came to my bedside，bidding me to fly—no voice of mercy forewarned me inmy dreams of the trials that were just at hand.
　　the next day there was a great pageant in washington.
　　the roar of cannon and the tolling of bells filled the air，while many houses were shrouded with crape， and thestreets were black with people. as the day advanced， theprocession made its appearance， coming slowly throughthe avenue， carriage after carriage， in long succession，while thousands upon thousands followed on foot—allmoving to the sound of melancholy music. they werebearing the dead body of harrison to the grave.
　　from early in the morning， i was constantly in thecompany of hamilton and brown. they were the only persons i knew in washington. we stood together as thefuneral pomp passed by. i remember distinctly how thewindow glass would break and rattle to the ground， aftereach report of the cannon they were firing in the burialground. we went to the capitol， and walked a long timeabout the grounds. in the afternoon， they strolled towardsthe president’s house， all the time keeping me near tothem， and pointing out various places of interest. as yet， ihad seen nothing of the circus. in fact， i had thought of itbut little， if at all， amidst the excitement of the day.




第7章 Chapter II.(3)


　　my friends， several times during the afternoon，entered drinking saloons， and called for liquor. theywere by no means in the habit， however， so far as i knewthem， of indulging to excess. on these occasions， afterserving themselves， they would pour out a glass and handit to me. i did not become intoxicated， as may be inferredfrom what subsequently occurred. towards evening，and soon after partaking of one of these potations， ibegan to experience most unpleasant sensations. i feltextremely ill. my head commenced aching—a dull， heavypain， inexpressibly disagreeable. at the supper table， iwas without appetite； the sight and flavor of food wasnauseous. about dark the same servant conducted meto the room i had occupied the previous night. brownand hamilton advised me to retire， commiserating mekindly， and expressing hopes that i would be better inthe morning. divesting myself of coat and boots merely， ithrew myself upon the bed. it was impossible to sleep. the pain in my head continued to increase， until it becamealmost unbearable. in a short time i became thirsty. mylips were parched. i could think of nothing but water—oflakes and flowing rivers， of brooks where i had stooped todrink， and of the dripping bucket， rising with its cool andoverflowing nectar， from the bottom of the well. towardsmidnight， as near as i could judge， i arose， unable longerto bear such intensity of thirst. i was a stranger in thehouse， and knew nothing of its apartments. there wasno one up， as i could observe. groping about at random，i knew not where， i found the way at last to a kitchen inthe basement. two or three colored servants were movingthrough it， one of whom， a woman， gave me two glassesof water. it afforded momentary relief， but by the time ihad reached my room again， the same burning desire ofdrink， the same tormenting thirst， had again returned. itwas even more torturing than before， as was also the wildpain in my head， if such a thing could be. i was in soredistress—in most excruciating agony！ i seemed to standon the brink of madness！ the memory of that night ofhorrible suffering will follow me to the grave.
　　in the course of an hour or more after my return fromthe kitchen， i was conscious of some one entering myroom. there seemed to be several—a mingling of variousvoices，—but how many， or who they were， i cannot tell.
　　whether brown and hamilton were among them， is amere matter of conjecture. i only remember， with anydegree of distinctness， that i was told it was necessary to go to a physician and procure medicine， and that pullingon my boots， without coat or hat， i followed them througha long passage-way， or alley， into the open street. it ranout at right angles from pennsylvania avenue. on theopposite side there was a light burning in a window. myimpression is there were then three persons with me， butit is altogether indefinite and vague， and like the memoryof a painful dream. going towards the light， which iimagined proceeded from a physician’s office， and whichseemed to recede as i advanced， is the last glimmeringrecollection i can now recall. from that moment i wasinsensible. how long i remained in that condition—whether only that night， or many days and nights— ido not know； but when consciousness returned， i foundmyself alone， in utter darkness， and in chains.
　　the pain in my head had subsided in a measure，but i was very faint and weak. i was sitting upon a lowbench， made of rough boards， and without coat or hat. iwas hand-cuffed. around my ankles also were a pair ofheavy fetters. one end of a chain was fastened to a largering in the floor， the other to the fetters on my ankles. itried in vain to stand upon my feet. waking from sucha painful trance， it was some time before i could collectmy thoughts. where was i？ what was the meaning ofthese chains？ where were brown and hamilton？ whathad i done to deserve imprisonment in such a dungeon？
　　i could not comprehend. there was a blank of someindefinite period， preceding my awakening in that lonely  place， the events of which the utmost stretch of memorywas unable to recall. i listened intently for some sign orsound of life， but nothing broke the oppressive silence，save the clinking of my chains， whenever i chanced tomove. i spoke aloud， but the sound of my voice startledme. i felt of my pockets， so far as the fetters wouldallow—far enough， indeed， to ascertain that i had notonly been robbed of liberty， but that my money and freepapers were also gone！ then did the idea begin to breakupon my mind， at first dim and confused， that i had beenkidnapped. but that i thought was incredible. there musthave been some misapprehension—some unfortunatemistake. it could not be that a free citizen of new york，who had wronged no man， nor violated any law， shouldbe dealt with thus inhumanly. the more i contemplatedmy situation， however， the more i became confirmedin my suspicions. it was a desolate thought， indeed. ifelt there was no trust or mercy in unfeeling man； andcommending myself to the god of the oppressed， bowedmy head upon my fettered hands， and wept most bitterly.
   



第8章 Chapter III.(1)


　　some three hours elapsed， during which time iremained seated on the low bench， absorbed in painfulmeditations. at length i heard the crowing of a cock， andsoon a distant rumbling sound， as of carriages hurryingthrough the streets， came to my ears， and i knew that itwas day. no ray of light， however， penetrated my prison.
　　finally， i heard footsteps immediately overhead， as ofsome one walking to and fro. it occurred to me then thati must be in an underground apartment， and the damp，mouldy odors of the place confirmed the supposition.
　　the noise above continued for at least an hour， when， atlast， i heard footsteps approaching from without. a keyrattled in the lock—a strong door swung back upon itshinges， admitting a flood of light， and two men enteredand stood before me. one of them was a large， powerfulman， forty years of age， perhaps， with dark， chestnutcoloredhair， slightly interspersed with gray. his face wasfull， his complexion flush， his features grossly coarse，expressive of nothing but cruelty and cunning. he wasabout five feet ten inches high， of full habit， and， withoutprejudice， i must be allowed to say， was a man whosewhole appearance was sinister and repugnant. his namewas james h. burch， as i learned afterwards—a wellknown slave-dealer in washington； and then， or latelyconnected in business， as a partner， with theophilusfreeman， of new-orleans. the person who accompaniedhim was a simple lackey， named ebenezer radburn， whoacted merely in the capacity of turnkey. both of thesemen still live in washington， or did， at the time of myreturn through that city from slavery in january last.
　　the light admitted through the open door enabled meto observe the room in which i was confined. it was abouttwelve feet square—the walls of solid masonry. the floorwas of heavy plank. there was one small window， crossedwith great iron bars， with an outside shutter， securelyfastened.
　　an iron-bound door led into an adjoining cell， or vault，wholly destitute of windows， or any means of admittinglight. the furniture of the room in which i was， consistedof the wooden bench on which i sat， an old-fashioned，dirty box stove， and besides these， in either cell， there wasneither bed， nor blanket， nor any other thing whatever.
　　the door， through which burch and radburn entered，led through a small passage， up a flight of steps into ayard， surrounded by a brick wall ten or twelve feet high，immediately in rear of a building of the same width asitself. the yard extended rearward from the house aboutthirty feet. in one part of the wall there was a stronglyironed door， opening into a narrow， covered passage，leading along one side of the house into the street. thedoom of the colored man， upon whom the door leading out of that narrow passage closed， was sealed. the topof the wall supported one end of a roof， which ascendedinwards， forming a kind of open shed. underneath theroof there was a crazy loft all round， where slaves， if sodisposed， might sleep at night， or in inclement weatherseek shelter from the storm. it was like a farmer’sbarnyard in most respects， save it was so constructed thatthe outside world could never see the human cattle thatwere herded there.
　　the building to which the yard was attached， wastwo stories high， fronting on one of the public streets ofwashington. its outside presented only the appearance ofa quiet private residence. a stranger looking at it， wouldnever have dreamed of its execrable uses. strange as itmay seem， within plain sight of this same house， lookingdown from its commanding height upon it， was thecapitol. the voices of patriotic representatives boastingof freedom and equality， and the rattling of the poorslave’s chains， almost commingled. a slave pen within thevery shadow of the capitol！
　　such is a correct deion as it was in 1841， ofwilliams’ slave pen in washington， in one of the cellarsof which i found myself so unaccountably confined.
　　“well， my boy， how do you feel now？” said burch，as he entered through the open door. i replied that iwas sick， and inquired the cause of my imprisonment.
　　he answered that i was his slave— that he had boughtme， and that he was about to send me to new-orleans.
　　i asserted， aloud and boldly， that i was a free man—aresident of saratoga， where i had a wife and children，who were also free， and that my name was northup.
　　i complained bitterly of the strange treatment i hadreceived， and threatened， upon my liberation， to havesatisfaction for the wrong. he denied that i was free，and with an emphatic oath， declared that i came fromgeorgia. again and again i asserted i was no man’s slave，and insisted upon his taking off my chains at once. heendeavored to hush me， as if he feared my voice would beoverheard. but i would not be silent， and denounced theauthors of my imprisonment， whoever they might be， asunmitigated villains. finding he could not quiet me， heflew into a towering passion. with blasphemous oaths， hecalled me a black liar， a runaway from georgia， and everyother profane and vulgar epithet that the most indecentfancy could conceive.
　　during this time radburn was standing silently by.
　　his business was， to oversee this human， or ratherinhuman stable， receiving slaves， feeding and whippingthem， at the rate of two shillings a head per day. turningto him， burch ordered the paddle and cat-o’-ninetails tobe brought in. he disappeared， and in a few momentsreturned with these instruments of torture. the paddle，as it is termed in slave-beating parlance， or at least theone with which i first became acquainted， and of whichi now speak， was a piece of hard-wood board， eighteenor twenty inches long， moulded to the shape of an old027fashioned pudding stick， or ordinary oar. the flattenedportion， which was about the size in circumference of twoopen hands， was bored with a small auger in numerousplaces. the cat was a large rope of many strands— thestrands unraveled， and a knot tied at the extremity of each.
下 //书 //网



第9章 Chapter III.(2)


　　as soon as these formidable whips appeared， i wasseized by both of them， and roughly divested of myclothing. my feet， as has been stated， were fastened tothe floor. drawing me over the bench， face downwards，radburn placed his heavy foot upon the fetters， betweenmy wrists， holding them painfully to the floor. with thepaddle， burch commenced beating me. blow after blowwas inflicted upon my naked body. when his unrelentingarm grew tired， he stopped and asked if i still insisted iwas a free man. i did insist upon it， and then the blowswere renewed， faster and more energetically， if possible，than before. when again tired， he would repeat the samequestion， and receiving the same answer， continue hiscruel labor. all this time， the incarnate devil was utteringmost fiendish oaths. at length the paddle broke， leavingthe useless handle in his hand. still i would not yield. allhis brutal blows could not force from my lips the foul liethat i was a slave. casting madly on the floor the handleof the broken paddle， he seized the rope. this was farmore painful than the other. i struggled with all my power，but it was in vain. i prayed for mercy， but my prayerwas only answered with imprecations and with stripes.
　　i thought i must die beneath the lashes of the accursed brute. even now the flesh crawls upon my bones， as i recallthe scene. i was all on fire. my sufferings i can compare tonothing else than the burning agonies of hell！
　　at last i became silent to his repeated questions. iwould make no reply. in fact， i was becoming almostunable to speak. still he plied the lash without stint uponscene in the slave pen at washington.
　　my poor body， until it seemed that the lacerated flesh wasstripped from my bones at every stroke. a man with aparticle of mercy in his soul would not have beaten even adog so cruelly. at length radburn said that it was uselessto whip me any more—that i would be sore enough.
　　thereupon burch desisted， saying， with an admonitoryshake of his fist in my face， and hissing the words throughhis firm-set teeth， that if ever i dared to utter again thati was entitled to my freedom， that i had been kidnapped，or any thing whatever of the kind， the castigation i hadjust received was nothing in comparison with what wouldfollow. he swore that he would either conquer or killme. with these consolatory words， the fetters were takenfrom my wrists， my feet still remaining fastened to thering； the shutter of the little barred window， which hadbeen opened， was again closed， and going out， locking thegreat door behind them， i was left in darkness as before.
　　in an hour， perhaps two， my heart leaped to my throat，as the key rattled in the door again. i， who had been solonely， and who had longed so ardently to see some one，i cared not who， now shuddered at the thought of man’sapproach. a human face was fearful to me， especially awhite one. radburn entered， bringing with him， on a tinplate， a piece of shriveled fried pork， a slice of bread and acup of water. he asked me how i felt， and remarked thati had received a pretty severe flogging. he remonstratedwith me against the propriety of asserting my freedom. inrather a patronizing and confidential manner， he gave it to me as his advice， that the less i said on that subject thebetter it would be for me. the man evidently endeavoredto appear kind—whether touched at the sight of my sadcondition， or with the view of silencing， on my part， anyfurther expression of my rights， it is not necessary nowto conjecture. he unlocked the festers from my ankles，opened the shutters of the little window， and departed，leaving me again alone.
　　by this time i had become stiff and sore； my bodywas covered with blisters， and it was with great pain anddifficulty that i could move. from the window i couldobserve nothing but the roof resting on the adjacent wall.
　　at night i laid down upon the damp， hard floor， withoutany pillow or covering whatever. punctually， twice a day，radburn came in， with his pork， and bread， and water.
　　i had but little appetite， though i was tormented withcontinual thirst. my wounds would not permit me toremain but a few minutes in any one position； so， sitting，or standing， or moving slowly round， i passed the days andnights. i was heart sick and discouraged. thoughts of myfamily， of my wife and children， continually occupied mymind. when sleep overpowered me i dreamed of them—dreamed i was again in saratoga—that i could see theirfaces， and hear their voices calling me. awakening fromthe pleasant phantasms of sleep to the bitter realitiesaround me， i could but groan and weep. still my spiritwas not broken. i indulged the anticipation of escape，and that speedily. it was impossible， i reasoned， that men031
　　could be so unjust as to detain me as a slave， when thetruth of my case was known. burch， ascertaining i was norunaway from georgia， would certainly let me go. thoughsuspicions of brown and hamilton were not unfrequent，i could not reconcile myself to the idea that they wereinstrumental to my imprisonment. surely they wouldseek me out—they would deliver me from thraldom. alas！
　　i had not then learned the measure of “man’s inhumanityto man，” nor to what limitless extent of wickedness hewill go for the love of gain.
　　in the course of several days the outer door wasthrown open， allowing me the liberty of the yard. therei found three slaves—one of them a lad of ten years， theothers young men of about twenty and twenty-five. i wasnot long in forming an acquaintance， and learning theirnames and the particulars of their history.
　　the eldest was a colored man named clemens ray.
　　he had lived in washington； had driven a hack， andworked in a livery stable there for a long time. he wasvery intelligent， and fully comprehended his situation.
　　the thought of going south overwhelmed him with grief.




第10章 Chapter III.(3)


　　burch had purchased him a few days before， and hadplaced him there until such time as he was ready to sendhim to the new-orleans market. from him i learned forthe first time that i was in william’s slave pen， a placei had never heard of previously. he described to me theuses for which it was designed. i repeated to him theparticulars of my unhappy story， but he could only giveme the consolation of his sympathy. he also advised meto be silent henceforth on the subject of my freedom，for， knowing the character of burch， he assured me thatit would only be attended with renewed whip-ping. thenext eldest was named john williams. he was raised invirginia， not far from washington. burch had taken himin payment of a debt， and he constantly entertained thehope that his master would redeem him—a hope that wassubsequently realized. the lad was a sprightly child， thatanswered to the name of randall. most of the time he wasplaying about the yard， but occasionally would cry， callingfor his mother， and wondering when she would come. hismother’s absence seemed to be the great and only grief inhis little heart. he was too young to realize his condition，and when the memory of his mother was not in his mind，he amused us with his pleasant pranks.
　　at night， ray， williams， and the boy， slept in the loftof the shed， while i was locked in the cell. finally wewere each provided with blankets， such as are used uponhorses—the only bedding i was allowed to have for twelveyears afterwards. ray and williams asked me manyquestions about new-york—how colored people weretreated there； how they could have homes and familiesof their own， with none to disturb and oppress them；and ray， especially， sighed continually for freedom. suchconversations， however， were not in the hearing of burch，or the keeper radburn. aspirations such as these wouldhave brought down the lash upon our backs.
　　it is necessary in this narrative， in order to presenta full and truthful statement of all the principal eventsin the history of my life， and to portray the institutionof slavery as i have seen and known it， to speak of wellknownplaces， and of many persons who are yet living.
　　i am， and always was， an entire stranger in washingtonand its vicinity—aside from burch and radburn， knowingno man there， except as i have heard of them through myenslaved companions. what i am about to say， if false，can be easily contradicted.
　　i remained in williams’ slave pen about two weeks.
　　the night previous to my departure a woman was broughtin， weeping bitterly， and leading by the hand a little child.
　　they were randall’s mother and half-sister. on meetingthem he was overjoyed， clinging to her dress， kissing thechild， and exhibiting every demonstration of delight.
　　the mother also clasped him in her arms， embraced himtenderly， and gazed at him fondly through her tears，calling him by many an endearing name.
　　emily， the child， was seven or eight years old， of lightcomplexion， and with a face of admirable beauty. her hairfell in curls around her neck， while the style and richnessof her dress， and the neatness of her whole appearanceindicated she had been brought up in the midst ofwealth. she was a sweet child indeed. the woman alsowas arrayed in silk， with rings upon her fingers， andgolden ornaments suspended from her ears. her air andmanners， the correctness and propriety of her language—all showed evidently， that she had sometime stood abovethe common level of a slave. she seemed to be amazedat finding herself in such a place as that. it was plainly asudden and unexpected turn of fortune that had broughther there. filling the air with her complaining she washustled， with the children and myself， into the cell.
　　language can convey but an inadequate impression ofthe lamentations to which she gave incessant utterance.
&下&书_ 网



第11章 Chapter III.(4)


　　throwing herself upon the floor， and encircling thechildren in her arms， she poured forth such touchingwords as only maternal love and kindness can suggest.
　　they nestled closely to her， as if there only was there anysafety or protection. at last they slept， their heads restingupon her lap. while they slumbered， she smoothed thehair back from their little foreheads， and talked to themall night long. she called them her darlings—her sweetbabes—poor innocent things， that knew not the miserythey were destined to endure. soon they would have nomother to comfort them—they would be taken from her.
　　what would become of them？ oh！ she could not live awayfrom her little emmy and her dear boy. they had alwaysbeen good children， and had such loving ways. it wouldbreak her heart， god knew， she said， if they were takenfrom her； and yet she knew they meant to sell them， and，may be， they would be separated， and could never seeeach other any more. it was enough to melt heart of stoneto listen to the pitiful expressions of that desolate anddistracted mother. her name was eliza； and this was thestory of her life， as she afterwards related it：
　　she was the slave of elisha berry， a rich man， livingin the neighborhood of washington. she was born，i think she said， on his plantation. years before， hehad fallen into dissipated habits， and quarreled withhis wife. in fact， soon after the birth of randall， theyseparated. leaving his wife and daughter in the housethey had always occupied， he erected a new one nearby，on the estate. into this house he brought eliza； and， oncondition of her living with him， she and her childrenwere to be emancipated. she resided with him there nineyears， with servants to attend upon her， and providedwith every comfort and luxury of life. emily was his child！
　　finally， her young mistress， who had always remainedwith her mother at the homestead， married a mr. jacobbrooks. at length， for some cause， （as i gathered fromher relation，） beyond berry’s control， a division of hisproperty was made. she and her children fell to the shareof mr. brooks. during the nine years she had lived withberry， in consequence of the position she was compelledto occupy， she and emily had become the object ofmrs. berry and her daughter’s hatred and dislike. berryhimself she represented as a man of naturally a kindheart， who always promised her that she should have herfreedom， and who， she had no doubt， would grant it toher then， if it were only in his power. as soon as they thuscame into the possession and control of the daughter， itbecame very manifest they would not live long together.
　　the sight of eliza seemed to be odious to mrs. brooks；neither could she bear to look upon the child， half-sister，and beautiful as she was！
　　the day she was led into the pen， brooks had broughther from the estate into the city， under pretence thatthe time had come when her free papers were to beexecuted， in fulfillment of her master’s promise. elatedat the prospect of immediate liberty， she decked herselfand little emmy in their best apparel， and accompaniedhim with a joyful heart. on their arrival in the city，instead of being baptized into the family of freemen， shewas delivered to the trader burch. the paper that wasexecuted was a bill of sale. the hope of years was blastedin a moment. from the hight of most exulting happinessto the utmost depths of wretchedness， she had that daydescended. no wonder that she wept， and filled the penwith wailings and expressions of heart-rending woe.
　　eliza is now dead. far up the red river， where it poursits waters sluggishly through the unhealthy low lands oflouisiana， she rests in the grave at last—the only restingplace of the poor slave！ how all her fears were realized—how she mourned day and night， and never would becomforted—how， as she predicted， her heart did indeedbreak， with the burden of maternal sorrow， will be seenas the narrative proceeds.
&下&书_ 网



第12章 Chapter IV.(1)


　　at intervals during the first night of eliza’s incarcerationin the pen， she complained bitterly of jacob brooks， heryoung mistress’ husband. she declared that had she beenaware of the deception he intended to practice upon her， henever would have brought her there alive. they had chosenthe opportunity of getting her away when master berrywas absent from the plantation. he had always been kindto her. she wished that she could see him； but she knewthat even he was unable now to rescue her. then wouldshe commence weeping again—kissing the sleepingchildren—talking first to one， then to the other， as theylay in their unconscious slumbers， with their heads uponher lap. so wore the long night away； and when themorning dawned， and night had come again， still she keptmourning on， and would not be consoled.
　　about midnight following， the cell door opened， andburch and radburn entered， with lanterns in their hands.
　　burch， with an oath， ordered us to roll up our blanketswithout delay， and get ready to go on board the boat. heswore we would be left unless we hurried fast. he arousedthe children from their slumbers with a rough shake， andsaid they were d—d sleepy， it appeared. going out intothe yard， he called clem ray， ordering him to leave the038
　　loft and come into the cell， and bring his blanket withhim. when clem appeared， he placed us side by side，and fastened us together with hand-cuffs—my left handto his right. john williams had been taken out a day ortwo before， his master having redeemed him， greatlyto his delight. clem and i were ordered to march， elizaand the children following， we were conducted into theyard， from thence into the covered passage， and up aflight of steps through a side door into the upper room，where i had heard the walking to and fro. its furniturewas a stove， a few old chairs， and a long table， coveredwith papers. it was a white-washed room， without anycarpet on the floor， and seemed a sort of office. by oneof the windows， i remember， hung a rusty sword， whichattracted my attention. burch’s trunk was there. inobedience to his orders， i took hold of one of its handleswith my unfettered hand， while he taking hold of theother， we proceeded out of the front door into the streetin the same order as we had left the cell.
　　it was a dark night. all was quiet. i could see lights，or the reflection of them， over towards pennsylvaniaavenue， but there was no one， not even a straggler， tobe seen. i was almost resolved to attempt to break away.
　　had i not been hand-cuffed the attempt would certainlyhave been made， whatever consequence might havefollowed. radburn was in the rear， carrying a large stick，and hurrying up the children as fast as the little onescould walk. so we passed， hand-cuffed and in silence， through the streets of washington through the capitalof a nation， whose theory of government， we are told，rests on the foundation of man’s inalienable right to life，liberty， and the pursuit of happiness！ hail！ columbia，happy land， indeed！
　　reaching the steamboat， we were quickly hustledinto the hold， among barrels and boxes of freight. acolored servant brought a light， the bell rung， and soonthe vessel started down the potomac， carrying us weknew not where. the bell tolled as we passed the tombof washington！ burch， no doubt， with uncovered head，bowed reverently before the sacred ashes of the man whodevoted his illustrious life to the liberty of his country.
　　none of us slept that night but randall and littleemmy. for the first time clem ray was wholly overcome.
　　to him the idea of going south was terrible in theextreme. he was leaving the friends and associations ofhis youth every thing， that was dear and precious to hisheart—in all probability never to return. he and elizamingled their tears together， bemoaning their cruel fate.
　　for my own part， difficult as it was， i endeavored to keepup my spirits. i resolved in my mind a hundred plans ofescape， and fully determined to make the attempt the firstdesperate chance that offered. i had by this time becomesatisfied， however， that my true policy was to say nothingfurther on the subject of my having been born a freeman.
　　it would but expose me to mal-treatment， and diminishthe chances of liberation.
　　after sunrise in the morning we were called up on deckto breakfast. burch took our hand-cuffs off， and we satdown to table. he asked eliza if she would take a dram.
　　she declined， thanking him politely. during the meal wewere all silent—not a word passed between us. a mulattowoman who served at table seemed to take an interestin our behalf—told us to cheer up， and not to be so castdown. breakfast over， the hand-cuffs were restored， andburch ordered us out on the stern deck. we sat downtogether on some boxes， still saying nothing in burch’spresence. occasionally a passenger would walk out towhere we were， look at us for a while， then silently return.
　　it was a very pleasant morning. the fields along theriver were covered with verdure， far in advance of whati had been accustomed to see at that season of the year.
　　the sun shone out warmly； the birds were singing inthe trees. the happy birds—i envied them. i wished forwings like them， that i might cleave the air to where mybirdlings waited vainly for their father’s coming， in thecooler region of the north.
　　in the forenoon the steamer reached aquia creek.
　　there the passengers took stages—burch and his fiveslaves occupying one exclusively. he laughed with thechildren， and at one stopping place went so far as topurchase them a piece of gingerbread. he told me to holdup my head and look smart. that i might， perhaps， geta good master if i behaved myself. i made him no reply.
　　his face was hateful to me， and i could not bear to look upon it. i sat in the corner， cherishing in my heart thehope， not yet extinct， of some day meeting the tyrant onthe soil of my native state.
   www.ｌzuoＷen．Ｃom



第13章 Chapter IV.(2)


　　at fredericksburgh we were transferred from the stagecoach to a car， and before dark arrived in richmond，the chief city of virginia. at this city we were taken fromthe cars， and driven through the street to a slave pen，between the railroad depot and the river， kept by a mr.
　　goodin. this pen is similar to williams’ in washington，except it is somewhat larger； and besides， there weretwo small houses standing at opposite corners withinthe yard. these houses are usually found within slaveyards， being used as rooms for the examination of humanchattels by purchasers before concluding a bargain.
　　unsoundness in a slave， as well as in a horse， detractsmaterially from his value. if no warranty is given， a closeexamination is a matter of particular importance to thenegro jockey.
　　we were met at the door of goodin’s yard by thatgentleman himself—a short， fat man， with a round， plumpface， black hair and whiskers， and a complexion almostas dark as some of his own negroes. he had a hard， sternlook， and was perhaps about fifty years of age. burchand he met with great cordiality. they were evidently oldfriends. shaking each other warmly by the hand， burchremarked he had brought some company， inquired atwhat time the brig would leave， and was answered thatit would probably leave the next day at such an hour.
　　goodin then turned to me， took hold of my arm， turnedme partly round， looked at me sharply with the air of onewho considered himself a good judge of property， and as ifestimating in his own mind about how much i was worth.
　　“well， boy， where did you come from？”
　　forgetting myself， for a moment， i answered， “fromnew-york.”
　　“new-york！ h—l！ what have you been doing up there？”
　　was his astonished interrogatory.
　　observing burch at this moment looking at me withan angry expression that conveyed a meaning it was notdifficult to understand， i immediately said， “o， i haveonly been up that way a piece，” in a manner intendedto imply that although i might have been as far as new-york， yet i wished it distinctly understood that i did notbelong to that free state， nor to any other.
　　goodin then turned to clem， and then to eliza andthe children， examining them severally， and askingvarious questions. he was pleased with emily， as wasevery one who saw the child’s sweet countenance. shewas not as tidy as when i first beheld her； her hair wasnow somewhat disheveled； but through its unkemptand soft profusion there still beamed a little face ofmost surpassing loveliness. “altogether we were a fairlot—a devilish good lot，” he said， enforcing that opinionwith more than one emphatic adjective not found in thechristian vocabulary. thereupon we passed into the yard.
　　quite a number of slaves， as many as thirty i should say，were moving about， or sitting on benches under the shed.
　　they were all cleanly dressed—the men with hats， thewomen with handkerchiefs tied about their heads.
　　burch and goodin， after separating from us， walkedup the steps at the back part of the main building， and satdown upon the door sill. they entered into conversation，but the subject of it i could not hear. presently burchcame down into the yard， unfettered me， and led me intoone of the small houses.
　　“you told that man you came from new-york，” said he.
　　i replied， “i told him i had been up as far as new-york，to be sure， but did not tell him i belonged there， nor thati was a freeman. i meant no harm at all， master burch. iwould not have said it had i thought.”
　　he looked at me a moment as if he was ready to devourme， then turning round went out. in a few minutes hereturned. “if ever i hear you say a word about new-york，or about your freedom， i will be the death of you—i willkill you； you may rely on that，” he ejaculated fiercely.
　　i doubt not he understood then better than i did， thedanger and the penalty of selling a free man into slavery.
　　he felt the necessity of closing my mouth against thecrime he knew he was committing. of course， my lifewould not have weighed a feather， in any emergencyrequiring such a sacrifice. undoubtedly， he meantprecisely what he said.
　　under the shed on one side of the yard， there wasconstructed a rough table， while overhead were sleeping lofts—the same as in the pen at washington. afterpartaking at this table of our supper of pork and bread，i was hand-cuffed to a large yellow man， quite stoutand fleshy， with a countenance expressive of the utmostmelancholy. he was a man of intelligence and information.




第14章 Chapter IV.(3)


　　chained together， it was not long before we becameacquainted with each other’s history. his name wasrobert. like myself， he had been born free， and had awife and two children in cincinnati. he said he had comesouth with two men， who had hired him in the city of hisresidence. without free papers， he had been seized atfredericksburgh， placed in confinement， and beaten untilhe had learned， as i had， the necessity and the policyof silence. he had been in goodin’s pen about threeweeks. to this man i became much attached. we couldsympathize with， and understand each other. it was withtears and a heavy heart， not many days subsequently，that i saw him die， and looked for the last time upon hislifeless form！
　　robert and myself， with clem， eliza and her children，slept that night upon our blankets， in one of the smallhouses in the yard. there were four others， all from thesame plantation， who had been sold， and were now ontheir way south， who also occupied it with us. davidand his wife， caroline， both mulattos， were exceedinglyaffected. they dreaded the thought of being put into thecane and cotton fields； but their greatest source of anxietywas the apprehension of being separated. mary， a tall，lithe girl， of a most jetty black， was listless and apparentlyindifferent. like many of the class， she scarcely knewthere was such a word as freedom. brought up in theignorance of a brute， she possessed but little more thana brute’s intelligence. she was one of those， and thereare very many， who fear nothing but their master’slash， and know no further duty than to obey his voice.
　　the other was lethe. she was of an entirely differentcharacter. she had long， straight hair， and bore more theappearance of an indian than a negro woman. she hadsharp and spiteful eyes， and continually gave utteranceto the language of hatred and revenge. her husband hadbeen sold. she knew not where she was. an exchange ofmasters， she was sure， could not be for the worse. shecared not whither they might carry her. pointing to thescars upon her face， the desperate creature wished thatshe might see the day when she could wipe them off insome man’s blood！
　　while we were thus learning the history of each other’swretchedness， eliza was seated in a corner by herself，singing hymns and praying for her children. weariedfrom the loss of so much sleep， i could no longer bear upagainst the advances of that “sweet restorer，” and layingdown by the side of robert， on the floor， soon forgot mytroubles， and slept until the dawn of day.
　　in the morning， having swept the yard， and washedourselves， under goodin’s superintendence， we wereordered to roll up our blankets， and make ready for the continuance of our journey. clem ray was informed thathe would go no further， burch， for some cause， havingconcluded to carry him back to washington. he wasmuch rejoiced. shaking hands， we parted in the slave penat richmond， and i have not seen him since. but， muchto my surprise， since my return， i learned that he hadescaped from bondage， and on his way to the free soil ofcanada， lodged one night at the house of my brother-inlawin saratoga， informing my family of the place and thecondition in which he left me.
　　in the afternoon we were drawn up， two abreast，robert and myself in advance， and in this order， drivenby burch and goodin from the yard， through the streetsof richmond to the brig orleans. she was a vessel ofrespectable size， full rigged， and freighted principallywith tobacco. we were all on board by five o’clock. burchbrought us each a tin cup and a spoon. there were fortyof us in the brig， being all， except clem， that were in thepen.
　　with a small pocket knife that had not been takenfrom me， i began cutting the initials of my name uponthe tin cup. the others immediately flocked round me，requesting me to mark theirs in a similar manner. intime， i gratified them all， of which they did not appear tobe forgetful.
　　we were all stowed away in the hold at night， and thehatch barred down. we laid on boxes， or where ever therewas room enough to stretch our blankets on the floor.
　　burch accompanied us no farther than richmond，returning from that point to the capital with clem. notuntil the lapse of almost twelve years， to wit， in januarylast， in the washington police office， did i set my eyesupon his face again.
　　james h. burch was a slave-trader—buying men，women and children at low prices， and selling them atan advance. he was a speculator in human flesh —adisreputable calling—and so considered at the south. forthe present he disappears from the scenes recorded inthis narrative， but he will appear again before its close，not in the character of a man-whipping tyrant， but as anarrested， cringing criminal in a court of law， that failed todo him justice.




第15章 Chapter V.(1)


　　after we were all on board， the brig orleans proceededdown james river. passing into chesapeake bay， wearrived next day opposite the city of norfolk. whilelying at anchor， a lighter approached us from the town，bringing four more slaves. frederick， a boy of eighteen，had been born a slave， as also had henry， who was someyears older. they had both been house servants in thecity. maria was a rather genteel looting colored girl， witha faultless form， but ignorant and extremely vain. theidea of going to new-orleans was pleasing to her. sheentertained an extravagantly high opinion of her ownattractions. assuming a haughty mien， she declaredto her companions， that immediately on our arrival innew-orleans， she had no doubt， some wealthy singlegentleman of good taste would purchase her at once！
　　but the most prominent of the four， was as a mannamed arthur. as the lighter approached， he struggledstoutly with his keepers. it was with main force thathe was dragged aboard the brig. he protested， in aloud voice， against the treatment he was receiving， anddemanded to be released. his face was swollen， andcovered with wounds and bruises， and， indeed， oneside of it was a complete raw sore. he was forced， with all haste， down the hatchway into the hold. i caught anoutline of his story as he was borne struggling along， ofwhich he afterwards gave me a more full relation， and itwas as follows： he had long resided in the city of norfolk，and was a free man. he had a family living there， and wasa mason by trade. having been unusually detained， hewas returning late one night to his house in the suburbsof the city， when he was attacked by a gang of persons inan unfrequented street. he fought until his strength failedhim. overpowered at last， he was gagged and bound withropes， and beaten， until he became insensible. for severaldays they secreted him in the slave pen at norfolk—avery common establishment， it appears， in the cities ofthe south. the night before， he had been taken out andput on board the lighter， which， pushing out from shore，had awaited our arrival. for some time he continuedhis protestations， and was altogether irreconcilable. atlength， however， he became silent. he sank into a gloomyand thoughtful mood， and appeared to be counselingwith himself. there was in the man’s determined face，something that suggested the thought of desperation.
　　after leaving norfolk the hand-cuffs were taken off，and during the day we were allowed to remain on deck.
　　the captain selected robert as his waiter， and i wasappointed to superintend the cooking department， andthe distribution of food and water. i had three assistants，jim， cuffee and jenny. jenny’s business was to preparethe coffee， which consisted of corn meal scorched in a kettle， boiled and sweetened with molasses. jim andcuffee baked the hoe-cake and boiled the bacon.
　　standing by a table， formed of a wide board resting onthe heads of the barrels， i cut and handed to each a sliceof meat and a “dodger” of the bread， and from jenny’skettle also dipped out for each a cup of the coffee. the useof plates was dispensed with， and their sable fingers tookthe place of knives and forks. jim and cuffee were verydemure and attentive to business， somewhat inflated withtheir situation as second cooks， and without doubt feelingthat there was a great responsibility resting on them. iwas called steward—a name given me by the captain.
　　the slaves were fed twice a day， at ten and fiveo’clock—always receiving the same kind and quantityof fare， and in the same manner as above described. atnight we were driven into the hold， and securely fasteneddown.
　　scarcely were we out of sight of land before we wereovertaken by a violent storm. the brig rolled and plungeduntil we feared she would go down. some were seasick，others on their knees praying， while some werefast holding to each other， paralyzed with fear. thesea-sickness rendered the place of our confinementloathsome and disgusting. it would have been a happything for most of us—it would have saved the agony ofmany hundred lashes， and miserable deaths at last—hadthe compassionate sea snatched us that day from theclutches of remorseless men. the thought of randall and little emmy sinking down among the monsters ofthe deep， is a more pleasant contemplation than to thinkof them as they are now， perhaps， dragging out lives ofunrequited toil.
　　when in sight of the bahama banks， at a place calledold point compass， or the hole in the wall， we werebecalmed three days. there was scarcely a breath ofair. the waters of the gulf presented a singularly whiteappearance， like lime water.
　　in the order of events， i come now to the relation of anoccurrence， which i never call to mind but with sensationsof regret. i thank god， who has since permitted me toescape from the thralldom of slavery， that through hismerciful interposition i was prevented from imbruingmy hands in the blood of his creatures. let not those whohave never been placed in like circumstances， judge meharshly. until they have been chained and beaten—untilthey find themselves in the situation i was， borne awayfrom home and family towards a land of bondage—letthem refrain from saying what they would not do forliberty. how far i should have been justified in the sightof god and man， it is unnecessary now to speculateupon. it is enough to say that i am able to congratulatemyself upon the harmless termination of an affair whichthreatened， for a time， to be attended with serious results.
　　towards evening， on the first day of the calm， arthurand myself were in the bow of the vessel， seated on thewindlass. we were conversing together of the probable  destiny that awaited us， and mourning together overour misfortunes. arthur said， and i agreed with him，that death was far less terrible than the living prospectthat was before us. for a long time we talked of ourchildren， our past lives， and of the probabilities of escape.
  



第16章 Chapter V.(2)


　　obtaining possession of the brig was suggested by one ofus. we discussed the possibility of our being able， in suchan event， to make our way to the harbor of new-york.
　　i knew little of the compass； but the idea of risking theexperiment was eagerly entertained. the chances， for andagainst us， in an encounter with the crew， was canvassed.
　　who could be relied upon， and who could not， the propertime and manner of the attack， were all talked over andover again. from the moment the plot suggested itselfi began to hope. i revolved it constantly in my mind. asdifficulty after difficulty arose， some ready conceit wasat hand， demonstrating how it could be overcome. whileothers slept， arthur and i were maturing our plans. atlength， with much caution， robert was gradually madeacquainted with our intentions. he approved of themat once， and entered into the conspiracy with a zealousspirit. there was not another slave we dared to trust.
　　brought up in fear and ignorance as they are， it canscarcely be conceived how servilely they will cringe beforea white man’s look. it was not safe to deposit so bold asecret with any of them， and finally we three resolved totake upon ourselves alone the fearful responsibility of theattempt.
　　at night， as has been said， we were driven into thehold， and the hatch barred down. how to reach the deckwas the first difficulty that presented itself. on the bowof the brig， however i had observed the small boat lyingbottom upwards. it occurred to me that by secretingourselves underneath it， we would not be missed from thecrowd， as they were hurried down into the hold at night.
　　i was selected to make the experiment， in order to satisfyourselves of its feasibility. the next evening， accordingly，after supper， watching my opportunity， i hastilyconcealed myself beneath it. lying close upon the deck，i could see what was going on around me， while whollyunperceived myself. in the morning， as they came up， islipped from my hiding place without being observed.
　　the result was entirely satisfactory.
　　the captain and mate slept in the cabin of the former.
　　from robert， who had frequent occasion， in his capacityof waiter， to make observations in that quarter， weascertained the exact position of their respective berths.
　　he further informed us that there were always two pistolsand a cutlass lying on the table. the crew’s cook slept inthe cook galley on deck， a sort of vehicle on wheels， thatcould be moved about as convenience required， while thesailors， numbering only six， either slept in the forecastle，or in hammocks swung among the rigging.
　　finally our arrangements were all completed. arthurand i were to steal silently to the captain’s cabin， seize thepistols and cutlass， and as quickly as possible despatch him and the mate. robert， with a club， was to stand bythe door leading from the deck down into the cabin，and， in case of necessity， beat back the sailors， until wecould hurry to his assistance. we were to proceed thenas circumstances might require. should the attack be sosudden and successful as to prevent resistance， the hatchwas to remain barred down； otherwise the slaves were tobe called up， and in the crowd， and hurry， and confusionof the time， we resolved to regain our liberty or lose ourlives. i was then to assume the unaccustomed place ofpilot， and， steering northward， we trusted that somelucky wind might bear us to the soil of freedom.
　　the mate’s name was biddee， the captain’s i cannotnow recall， though i rarely ever forget a name once heard.
　　the captain was a small， genteel man， erect and prompt，with a proud bearing， and looked the personificationof courage. if he is still living， and these pages shouldchance to meet his eye， he will learn a fact connected withthe voyage of the brig， from richmond to new-orleans，in 1841， not entered on his log-book.
　　we were all prepared， and impatiently waiting anopportunity of putting our designs into execution， whenthey were frustrated by a sad and unforeseen event.
　　robert was taken ill. it was soon announced that he hadthe small-pox. he continued to grow worse， and fourdays previous to our arrival in new-orleans he died. oneof the sailors sewed him in his blanket， with a large stonefrom the ballast at his feet， and then laying him on a hatchway， and elevating it with tackles above the railing，the inanimate body of poor robert was consigned to thewhite waters of the gulf.
　　we were all panic-stricken by the appearance of thesmall-pox. the captain ordered lime to be scatteredthrough the hold， and other prudent precautions to betaken. the death of robert， however， and the presenceof the malady， oppressed me sadly， and i gazed out overthe great waste of waters with a spirit that was indeeddisconsolate.
　　an evening or two after robert’s burial， i was leaningon the hatchway near the forecastle， full of despondingthoughts， when a sailor in a kind voice asked me why iwas so down-hearted. the tone and manner of the manassured me， and i answered， because i was a freeman，and had been kidnapped. he remarked that it wasenough to make any one down-hearted， and continuedto interrogate me until he learned the particulars ofmy whole history. he was evidently much interested inmy behalf， and， in the blunt speech of a sailor， sworehe would aid me all he could， if it “split his timbers.” irequested him to furnish me pen， ink and paper， in orderthat i might write to some of my friends. he promised toobtain them—but how i could use them undiscovered wasa difficulty. if i could only get into the forecastle whilehis watch was off， and the other sailors asleep， the thingcould be accomplished. the small boat instantly occurredto me. he thought we were not far from the balize， at the056
　　mouth of the mississippi， and it was necessary that theletter be written soon， or the opportunity would be lost.
  #下!书! 网



第17章 Chapter V.(3)


　　accordingly， by arrangement， i managed the next nightto secret myself again under the long-boat. his watch wasoff at twelve. i saw him pass into the forecastle， and inabout an hour followed him. he was nodding over a table，half asleep， on which a sickly light was flickering， and onwhich also was a pen and sheet of paper. as i entered hearoused， beckoned me to a seat beside him， and pointedto the paper. i directed the letter to henry b. northup， ofsandy hill—stating that i had been kidnapped， was thenon board the brig orleans， bound for new-orleans； thatit was then impossible for me to conjecture my ultimatedestination， and requesting he would take measuresto rescue me. the letter was sealed and directed， andmanning， having read it， promised to deposit it in thenew-orleans post-office. i hastened back to my placeunder the long-boat， and in the morning， as the slavescame up and were walking round， crept out unnoticedand mingled with them.
　　my good friend， whose name was john manning， wasan englishman by birth， and a noble-hearted， generoussailor as ever walked a deck. he had lived in boston—wasa tall， well-built man， about twenty-four years old， witha face somewhat pock-marked， but full of benevolentexpression.
　　nothing to vary the monotony of our daily life occurred，until we reached new-orleans. on coming to the levee，and before the vessel was made fast， i saw manning leapon shore and hurry away into the city. as he started off helooked back over his shoulder significantly， giving me tounderstand the object of his errand. presently he returned，and passing close by me， hunched me with his elbow，with a peculiar wink， as much as to say， “it is all right.”
　　the letter， as i have since learned， reached sandy hill.
　　mr. northup visited albany and laid it before governorseward， but inasmuch as it gave no definite informationas to my probable locality， it was not， at that time，deemed advisable to institute measures for my liberation.
　　it was concluded to delay， trusting that a knowledge ofwhere i was might eventually be obtained.
　　a happy and touching scene was witnessed immediatelyupon our reaching the levee. just as manning left the brig，on his way to the post-office two men came up and calledaloud for arthur. the latter， as he recognized them， wasalmost crazy with delight. he could hardly be restrainedfrom leaping over the brig’s side； and when they met soonafter， he grasped them by the hand， and clung to them along， long time. they were men from norfolk， who hadcome on to new-orleans to rescue him. his kidnappers，they informed him， had been arrested， and were thenconfined in the norfolk prison. they conversed a fewmoments with the captain， and then departed with therejoicing arthur.
  



第18章 Chapter V.(4)


　　but in all the crowd that thronged the wharf， there wasno one who knew or cared for me. not one. no familiar voice greeted my ears， nor was there a single face that ihad ever seen. soon arthur would rejoin his family， andhave the satisfaction of seeing his wrongs avenged： myfamily， alas， should i ever see them more？ there was afeeling of utter desolation in my heart， filling it with adespairing and regretful sense， that i had not gone downwith robert to the bottom of the sea.
　　very soon traders and consignees came on board.
　　one， a tall， thin-faced man， with light complexion anda little bent， made his appearance， with a paper in hishand. burch’s gang， consisting of myself， eliza and herchildren， harry， lethe， and some others， who had joinedus at richmond， were consigned to him. this gentlemanwas mr. theophilus freeman. reading from his paper，he called， “platt.” no one answered. the name was calledagain and again， but still there was no reply. then lethewas called， then eliza， then harry， until the list wasfinished， each one stepping forward as his or her namewas called.
　　“captain， where’s platt？” demanded theophilus freeman.
　　the captain was unable to inform him， no one being，on board answering to that name.
　　“who shipped that nigger？” he again inquired of thecaptain， pointing to me.
　　“burch，” replied the captain.
　　“your name is platt—you answer my description. whydon’t you come forward？” he demanded of me， in anangry tone.
　　i informed him that was not my name； that i hadnever been called by it， but that i had no objection to it asi knew of.
　　“well， i will learn you your name，” said he； “and so youwon’t forget it either， by—，” he added.
　　mr. theophilus freeman， by the way， was not a whitbehind his partner， burch， in the matter of blasphemy.
　　on the vessel i had gone by the name of “steward，” andthis was the first time i had ever been designated asplatt—the name forwarded by burch to his consignee.
　　from the vessel i observed the chain-gang at work onthe levee. we passed near them as we were driven tofreeman’s slave pen. this pen is very similar to goodin’sin richmond， except the yard was enclosed by plank，standing upright， with ends sharpened， instead of brickwalls.
　　including us， there were now at least fifty in this pen.
　　depositing our blankets in one of the small buildingsin the yard， and having been called up and fed， we wereallowed to saunter about the enclosure until night， whenwe wrapped our blankets round us and laid down underthe shed， or in the loft， or in the open yard， just as eachone preferred.
　　it was but a short time i closed my eyes that night.
　　thought was busy in my brain. could it be possible thati was thousands of miles from home—that i had beendriven through the streets like a dumb beast— that i hadbeen chained and beaten without mercy—that i was even060
　　then herded with a drove of slaves， a slave myself？ werethe events of the last few weeks realities indeed？—orwas i passing only through the dismal phases of a long，protracted dream？ it was no illusion. my cup of sorrowwas full to overflowing. then i lifted up my hands togod， and in the still watches of the night， surrounded bythe sleeping forms of my companions， begged for mercyon the poor， forsaken captive. to the almighty fatherof us all—the freeman and the slave—i poured forth thesupplications of a broken spirit， imploring strength fromon high to bear up against the burden of my troubles，until the morning light aroused the slumberers， usheringin another day of bondage.




第19章 Chapter VI.(1)


　　the very amiable， pious-hearted mr. theophilusfreeman， partner or consignee of james h. burch， andkeeper of the slave pen in new-orleans， was out amonghis animals early in the morning. with an occasional kickof the older men and women， and many a sharp crackof the whip about the ears of the younger slaves， it wasnot long before they were all astir， and wide awake. mr.
　　theophilus freeman bustled about in a very industriousmanner， getting his property ready for the sales-room，intending， no doubt， to do that day a rousing business.
　　in the first place we were required to wash thoroughly，and those with beards， to shave. we were then furnishedwith a new suit each， cheap， but clean. the men hadhat， coat， shirt， pants and shoes； the women frocks ofcalico， and handkerchiefs to bind about their heads.
　　we were now conducted into a large room in the frontpart of the building to which the yard was attached， inorder to be properly trained， before the admission ofcustomers. the men were arranged on one side of theroom， the women on the other. the tallest was placedat the head of the row， then the next tallest， and so onin the order of their respective heights. emily was atthe foot of the line of women. freeman charged us to  remember our places； exhorted us to appear smart andlively， —sometimes threatening， and again， holding outvarious inducements. during the day he exercised us inthe art of “looking smart，” and of moving to our placeswith exact precision.
　　after being fed， in the afternoon， we were again paradedand made to dance. bob， a colored boy， who had sometime belonged to freeman， played on the violin. standingnear him， i made bold to inquire if he could play the“virginia reel.” he answered he could not， and asked meif i could play. replying in the affirmative， he handed methe violin. i struck up a tune， and finished it. freemanordered me to continue playing， and seemed well pleased，telling bob that i far excelled him—a remark that seemedto grieve my musical companion very much.
　　next day many customers called to examine freeman’s“new lot.” the latter gentleman was very loquacious，dwelling at much length upon our several good pointsand qualities. he would make us hold up our heads， walkbriskly back and forth， while customers would feel of ourhands and arms and bodies， turn us about， ask us whatwe could do， make us open our mouths and show ourteeth， precisely as a jockey examines a horse which heis about to barter for or purchase. sometimes a man orwoman was taken back to the small house in the yard，stripped， and inspected more minutely. scars upon aslave’s back were considered evidence of a rebellious orunruly spirit， and hurt his sale.
　　one old gentleman， who said he wanted a coachman，appeared to take a fancy to me. from his conversationwith freeman， i learned he was a resident in the city.
　　i very much desired that he would buy me， because iconceived it would not be difficult to make my escapefrom new-orleans on some northern vessel. freemanasked him fifteen hundred dollars for me. the oldgentleman insisted it was too much， as times were veryhard. freeman， however， declared that i was soundand healthy， of a good constitution， and intelligent. hemade it a point to enlarge upon my musical attainments.
　　the old gentleman argued quite adroitly that there wasnothing extraordinary about the nigger， and finally， tomy regret， went out， saying he would call again. duringthe day， however， a number of sales were made. davidand caroline were purchased together by a natchezplanter. they left us， grinning broadly， and in the mosthappy state of mind， caused by the fact of their not beingseparated. lethe was sold to a planter of baton rouge，her eyes flashing with anger as she was led away.
　　the same man also purchased randall. the littlefellow was made to jump， and run across the floor， andperform many other feats， exhibiting his activity andcondition. all the time the trade was going on， eliza wascrying aloud， and wringing her hands. she besought theman not to buy him， unless he also bought herself andemily. she promised， in that case， to be the most faithfulslave that ever lived. the man answered that he could not afford it， and then eliza burst into a paroxysm ofgrief， weeping plaintively. freeman turned round to her，savagely， with his whip in his uplifted hand， orderingher to stop her noise， or he would flog her. he would nothave such work—such snivelling； and unless she ceasedthat minute， he would take her to the yard and give hera hundred lashes. yes， he would take the nonsense outof her pretty quick—if he didn’t， might he be d—d. elizashrunk before him， and tried to wipe away her tears， butit was all in vain. she wanted to be with her children， shesaid， the little time she had to live. all the frowns andthreats of freeman， could not wholly silence the afflictedmother. she kept on begging and beseeching them， mostpiteously not to separate the three. over and over againshe told them how she loved her boy. a great many timesshe repeated her former promises—how very faithful andobedient she would be； how hard she would labor dayand night， to the last moment of her life， if he would onlybuy them all together. but it was of no avail； the mancould not afford it. the bargain was agreed upon， andrandall must go alone. then eliza ran to him； embracedhim passionately； kissed him again and again； told him toremember her—all the while her tears falling in the boy’sface like rain.
　　freeman damned her， calling her a blubbering，bawling wench， and ordered her to go to her place， andbehave herself； and be somebody. he swore he wouldn’tstand such stuff but a little longer. he would soon give her something to cry about， if she was not mighty careful，and that she might depend upon.
　　the planter from baton rouge， with his new purchases，was ready to depart.
　　“don’t cry， mama. i will be a good boy. don’t cry，” saidrandall， looking back， as they passed out of the door.




第20章 Chapter VI.(2)


　　what has become of the lad， god knows. it was amournful scene indeed. i would have cried myself if i haddared.
　　that night， nearly all who came in on the brig orleans，were taken ill. they complained of violent pain in thehead and back. little emily—a thing unusual withher—cried constantly. in the morning， a physician wascalled in， but was unable to determine the nature of ourcomplaint. while examining me， and asking questionstouching my symptoms， i gave it as my opinion that itwas an attack of smallpox—mentioning the fact of robert’sdeath as the reason of my belief. it might be so indeed， hethought， and he would send for the head physician of thehospital. shortly， the head physician came—a small， lighthairedman， whom they called dr. carr. he pronounced itsmall-pox， whereupon there was much alarm throughoutthe yard. soon after dr. carr left， eliza， emmy， harry andmyself were put into a hack and driven to the hospital—alarge white marble building， standing on the outskirts ofthe city. harry and i were placed in a room in one of theupper stories. i became very sick. for three days i wasentirely blind. while lying in this state one day， bob came  in， saying to dr. carr that freeman had sent him over toinquire how we were getting on. tell him， said the doctor，that platt is very bad， but that if he survives until nineo’clock， he may recover.
　　i expected to die. though there was little in the prospectbefore me worth living for， the near approach of deathappalled me. i thought i could have been resigned to yieldup my life in the bosom of my family， but to expire inthe midst of strangers， under such circumstances， was abitter reflection.
　　there were a great number in the hospital， of bothsexes， and of all ages. in the rear of the building coffinswere manufactured. when one died， the bell tolled—asignal to the undertaker to come and bear away the bodyto the potter’s field. many times， each day and night， thetolling bell sent forth its melancholy voice， announcinganother death. but my time had not yet come. the crisishaving passed， i began to revive， and at the end of twoweeks and two days， returned with harry to the pen，bearing upon my face the effects of the malady， whichto this day continues to disfigure it. eliza and emilywere also brought back next day in a hack， and againwere we paraded in the sales-room， for the inspectionand examination of purchasers. i still indulged the hopethat the old gentleman in search of a coachman wouldcall again， as he had promised， and purchase me. inthat event i felt an abiding confidence that i would soonregain my liberty. customer after customer entered， butthe old gentleman never made his appearance.
　　at length， one day， while we were in the yard， freemancame out and ordered us to our places， in the greatroom. a gentleman was waiting for us as we entered， andinasmuch as he will be often mentioned in the progress ofthis narrative， a deion of his personal appearance，and my estimation of his character， at first sight， may notbe out of place.
　　he was a man above the ordinary height， somewhatbent and stooping forward. he was a good-looking man，and appeared to have reached about the middle age oflife. there was nothing repulsive in his presence； buton the other hand， there was something cheerful andattractive in his face， and in his tone of voice. the finerelements were all kindly mingled in his breast， as anyone could see. he moved about among us， asking manyquestions， as to what we could do， and what labor we hadbeen accustomed to； if we thought we would like to livewith him， and would be good boys if he would buy us， andother interrogatories of like character.
　　after some further inspection， and conversationtouching prices， he finally offered freeman one thousanddollars for me， nine hundred for harry， and seven hundredfor eliza. whether the small-pox had depreciated ourvalue， or from what cause freeman had concluded to fallfive hundred dollars from the price i was before held at， icannot say. at any rate， after a little shrewd reflection， heannounced his acceptance of the offer.
　　as soon as eliza heard it， she was in an agony again.
下 //书 //网



第21章 Chapter VI.(3)


　　by this time she had become haggard and hollow-eyed with sickness and with sorrow. it would be a relief if icould consistently pass over in silence the scene that nowensued. it recalls memories more mournful and affectingthan any language can portray. i have seen motherskissing for the last time the faces of their dead offspring； ihave seen them looking down into the grave， as the earthfell with a dull sound upon their coffins， hiding themfrom their eyes forever； but never have i seen such anexhibition of intense， unmeasured， and unbounded grief，as when eliza was parted from her child. she broke fromher place in the line of women， and rushing down whereemily was standing， caught her in her arms. the child，sensible of some impending danger， instinctively fastenedher hands around her mother’s neck， and nestled herlittle head upon her bosom. freeman sternly orderedher to be quiet， but she did not heed him. he caught herby the arm and pulled her rudely， but she only clung thecloser to the child. then， with a volley of great oaths，he struck her such a heartless blow， that she staggeredbackward， and was like to fall. oh！ how piteously thendid she beseech and beg and pray that they might not beseparated. why could they not be purchased together？
　　why not let her have one of her dear children？ “mercy，mercy， master！” she cried， falling on her knees. “please，master， buy emily. i can never work any if she is takenfrom me： i will die.”
　　freeman interfered again， but， disregarding him， shestill plead most earnestly， telling how randall had been taken from her—how she never him see him again， andnow it was too bad—oh， god！ it was too bad， too cruel， totake her away from emily—her pride—her only darling，that could not live， it was so young， without its mother！
　　finally， after much more of supplication， the purchaserof eliza stepped forward， evidently affected， and said tofreeman he would buy emily， and asked him what herprice was.
　　“what is her price？ buy her？” was the responsiveinterrogatory of theophilus freeman. and instantlyanswering his own inquiry， he added， “i won’t sell her.
　　she’s not for sale.”
　　the man remarked he was not in need of one soyoung—that it would be of no profit to him， but sincethe mother was so fond of her， rather than see themseparated， he would pay a reasonable price. but to thishumane proposal freeman was entirely deaf. he wouldnot sell her then on any account whatever. there wereheaps and piles of money to be made of her， he said，when she was a few years older. there were men enoughin new-orleans who would give five thousand dollarsfor such an extra， handsome， fancy piece as emily wouldbe， rather than not get her. no， no， he would not sell herthen. she was a beauty—a picture—a doll—one of theregular bloods—none of your thick-lipped， bullet-headed，cotton-picking niggers—if she was might he be d—d.
　　when eliza heard freeman’s determination not to partwith emily， she became absolutely frantic.
　　“i will not go without her. they shall not take her fromme，” she fairly shrieked， her shrieks commingling withthe loud and angry voice of freeman， commanding her tobe silent.
　　meantime harry and myself had been to the yard andreturned with our blankets， and were at the front doorready to leave. our purchaser stood near us， gazing ateliza with an expression indicative of regret at havingbought her at the expense of so much sorrow. we waitedsome time， when， finally， freeman， out of patience， toreemily from her mother by main force， the two clinging toeach other with all their might.
　　“don’t leave me， mama—don’t leave me，” screamedthe child， as its mother was pushed harshly forward； “don’tleave me—come back， mama，” she still cried， stretchingforth her little arms imploringly. but she cried in vain. outof the door and into the street we were quickly hurried.
　　still we could hear her calling to her mother， “come back—don’t leave me—come back， mama，” until her infant voicegrew faint and still more faint， and gradually died away，as distance intervened， and finally was wholly lost.
　　eliza never after saw or heard of emily or randall.
　　day nor night， however， were they ever absent from hermemory. in the cotton field， in the cabin， always andeverywhere， she was talking of them—often to them， as ifthey were actually present. only when absorbed in thatillusion， or asleep， did she ever have a moment’s comfortafterwards.
　　she was no common slave， as has been said. to alarge share of natural intelligence which she possessed，was added a general knowledge and information onmost subjects. she had enjoyed opportunities such asseperation of eliza and her last child.
　　are afforded to very few of her oppressed class. she hadbeen lifted up into the regions of a higher life. freedom—freedom for herself and for her offspring， for many yearshad been her cloud by day， her pillar of fire by night. inher pilgrimage through the wilderness of bondage， witheyes fixed upon that hope-inspiring beacon， she had atlength ascended to “the top of pisgah，” and beheld “theland of promise.” in an unexpected moment she wasutterly overwhelmed with disappointment and despair.
　　the glorious vision of liberty faded from her sight asthey led her away into captivity. now “she weepeth sorein the night， and tears are on her cheeks： all her friendshave dealt treacherously with her： they have become herenemies.”
下 /书 网



第22章 Chapter VII.(1)


　　on leaving， the new-orleans slave pen， harry and ifollowed our new master through the streets， while eliza，crying and turning back， was forced along by freemanand his minions， until we found ourselves on boardthe steamboat rodolph， then lying at the levee. in thecourse of half an hour we were moving briskly up themississippi， bound for some point on red river. therewere quite a number of slaves on board beside ourselves，just purchased in the new-orleans market. i remembera mr. kelsow， who was said to be a well known andextensive planter， had in charge a gang of women.
　　our master’s name was william ford. he resided thenin the “great pine woods，” in the parish of avoyelles，situated on the right bank of red river， in the heart oflouisiana. he is now a baptist preacher. throughoutthe whole parish of avoyelles， and especially along bothshores of bayou boeuf， where he is more intimatelyknown， he is accounted by his fellow-citizens as a worthyminister of god. in many northern minds， perhaps，the idea of a man holding his brother man in servitude，and the traffic in human flesh， may seem altogetherincompatible with their conceptions of a moral orreligious life. from deions of such men as burch and074
　　freeman， and others hereinafter mentioned， they are ledto despise and execrate the whole class of slaveholders，indiscriminately. but i was sometime his slave， andhad an opportunity of learning well his character anddisposition， and it is but simple justice to him wheni say， in my opinion， there never was a more kind，noble， candid， christian man than william ford. theinfluences and associations that had always surroundedhim， blinded him to the inherent wrong at the bottomof the system of slavery. he never doubted the moralright of one man holding another in subjection. lookingthrough the same medium with his fathers before him，he saw things in the same light. brought up under othercircumstances and other influences， his notions wouldundoubtedly have been different. nevertheless， he was amodel master， walking uprightly， according to the light ofhis understanding， and fortunate was the slave who cameto his possession. were all men such as he， slavery wouldbe deprived of more than half its bitterness.
　　we were two days and three nights on board thesteamboat rodolph， during which time nothing ofparticular interest occurred. i was now known as platt， thename given me by burch， and by which i was designatedthrough the whole period of my servitude. eliza was soldby the name of “dradey.” she was so distinguished inthe conveyance to ford， now on record in the recorder’soffice in new-orleans.
　　on our passage i was constantly reflecting on my situation， and consulting with myself on the best course topursue in order to effect my ultimate escape. sometimes，not only then， but afterwards， i was almost on the pointof disclosing fully to ford the facts of my history. i aminclined now to the opinion it would have resulted in mybenefit. this course was often considered， but throughfear of its miscarriage， never put into execution， untileventually my transfer and his pecuniary embarrassmentsrendered it evidently unsafe. afterwards， under othermasters， unlike william ford， i knew well enough theslightest knowledge of my real character would consignme at once to the remoter depths of slavery. i was toocostly a chattel to be lost， and was well aware that i wouldbe taken farther on， into some by-place， over the texanborder， perhaps， and sold； that i would be disposed ofas the thief disposes of his stolen horse， if my right tofreedom was even whispered. so i resolved to lock thesecret closely in my heart—never to utter one word orsyllable as to who or what i was—trusting in providenceand my own shrewdness for deliverance.
　　at length we left the steamboat rodolph at a placecalled alexandria， several hundred miles from new-orleans. it is a small town on the southern shore of redriver. having remained there over night， we enteredthe morning train of cars， and were soon at bayoulamourie， a still smaller place， distant eighteen milesfrom alexandria. at that time it was the terminationof the railroad. ford’s plantation was situated on the076
　　texas road， twelve miles from lamourie， in the greatpine woods. this distance， it was announced to us，must be traveled on foot， there being public conveyancesno farther. accordingly we all set out in the companyof ford. it was an excessively hot day. harry， eliza，and myself were yet weak， and the bottoms of our feetwere very tender from the effects of the small-pox. weproceeded slowly， ford telling us to take our time andsit down and rest whenever we desired—a privilege thatwas taken advantage of quite frequently. after leavinglamourie and crossing two plantations， one belonging tomr. carnell， the other to a mr. flint， we reached the pinewoods， a wilderness that stretches to the sabine river.
　　the whole country about red river is low and marshy.
　　the pine woods， as they are called， is comparativelyupland， with frequent small intervals， however， runningthrough them. this upland is covered with numeroustrees—the white oak， the chincopin， resembling chestnut，but principally the yellow pine. they are of great size，running up sixty feet， and perfectly straight. the woodswere full of cattle， very shy and wild， dashing away inherds， with a loud snuff， at our approach. some of themwere marked or branded， the rest appeared to be in theirwild and untamed state. they are much smaller thannorthern breeds， and the peculiarity about them thatmost attracted my attention was their horns. they standout from the sides of the head precisely straight， like twoiron spikes.
  



第23章 Chapter VII.(2)


　　at noon we reached a cleared piece of ground containingthree or four acres. upon it was a small， unpainted， woodenhouse， a corn crib， or， as we would say， a barn， and a logkitchen， standing about a rod from the house. it was thesummer residence of mr. martin. rich planters， havinglarge establishments on bayou boeuf， are accustomed tospend the warmer season in these woods. here they findclear water and delightful shades. in fact， these retreatsare to the planters of that section of the country whatnewport and saratoga are to the wealthier inhabitants ofnorthern cities.
　　we were sent around into the kitchen， and suppliedwith sweet potatoes， corn-bread， and bacon， while masterford dined with martin in the house. there were severalslaves about the premises. martin came out and took alook at us， asking ford the price of each， if we were greenhands， and so forth， and making inquiries in relation tothe slave market generally.
　　after a long rest we set forth again， following the texasroad， which had the appearance of being very rarelytraveled. for five miles we passed through continuouswoods without observing a single habitation. at length，just as the sun was sinking in the west， we enteredanother opening， containing some twelve or fifteen acres.
　　in this opening stood a house much larger than mr.
　　martin’s. it was two stories high， with a piazza in front.
　　in the rear of it was also a log kitchen， poultry house，corncribs， and several negro cabins. near the house was a peach orchard， and gardens of orange and pomegranatetrees. the space was entirely surrounded by woods， andcovered with a carpet of rich， rank verdure. it was aquiet， lonely， pleasant place —literally a green spot in thewilderness. it was the residence of my master， williamford.
　　as we approached， a yellow girl—her name wasrose—was standing on the piazza. going to the door， shecalled her mistress， who presently came running out tomeet her lord. she kissed him， and laughingly demandedif he had bought “those niggers.” ford said he had， andtold us to go round to sally’s cabin and rest ourselves.
　　turning the corner of the house， we discovered sallywashing—her two baby children near her， rolling on thegrass. they jumped up and toddled towards us， looked atus a moment like a brace of rabbits， then ran back to theirmother as if afraid of us.
　　sally conducted us into the cabin， told us to lay downour bundles and be seated， for she was sure that we weretired. just then john， the cook， a boy some sixteen yearsof age， and blacker than any crow， came running in，looked steadily in our faces， then turning round， withoutsaying as much as “how d’ye do，” ran back to the kitchen，laughing loudly， as if our coming was a great joke indeed.
　　much wearied with our walk， as soon as it was dark，harry and i wrapped our blankets round us， and laid downupon the cabin floor. my thoughts， as usual， wanderedback to my wife and children. the consciousness of my  real situation； the hopelessness of any effort to escapethrough the wide forests of avoyelles， pressed heavilyupon me， yet my heart was at home in saratoga.
　　i was awakened early in the morning by the voice ofmaster ford， calling rose. she hastened into the houseto dress the children， sally to the field to milk the cows，while john was busy in the kitchen preparing breakfast.
　　in the meantime harry and i were strolling about theyard， looking at our new quarters. just after breakfasta colored man， driving three yoke of oxen， attached to awagon load of lumber， drove into the opening. he was aslave of ford’s， named walton， the husband of rose. bythe way， rose was a native of washington， and had beenbrought from thence five years before. she had neverseen eliza， but she had heard of berry， and they knew thesame streets， and the same people， either personally， orby reputation. they became fast friends immediately， andtalked a great deal together of old times， and of friendsthey had left behind.
　　ford was at that time a wealthy man. besides hisseat in the pine woods， he owned a large lumberingestablishment on indian creek， four miles distant， andalso， in his wife’s right， an extensive plantation and manyslaves on bayou boeuf.
　　walton had come with his load of lumber from themills on indian creek. ford directed us to return withhim， saying he would follow us as soon as possible. beforeleaving， mistress ford called me into the storeroom， and handed me， as it is there termed， a tin bucket of molassesfor harry and myself.
　　eliza was still ringing her hands and deploring the lossof her children. ford tried as much as possible to consoleher—told her she need not work very hard； that she mightremain with rose， and assist the madam in the houseaffairs.
　　riding with walton in the wagon， harry and i becamequite well acquainted with him long before reachingindian creek. he was a “born thrall” of ford’s， and spokekindly and affectionately of him， as a child would speakof his own father. in answer to his inquiries from whencei came， i told him from washington. of that city， he hadheard much from his wife， rose， and all the way plied mewith many extravagant and absurd questions.
　　on reaching the mills at indian creek， we foundtwo more of ford’s slaves， sam and antony. sam， also，was a washingtonian， having been brought out in thesame gang with rose. he had worked on a farm neargeorgetown. antony was a blacksmith， from kentucky，who had been in his present master’s service about tenyears. sam knew burch， and when informed that he wasthe trader who had sent me on from washington， it wasremarkable how well we agreed upon the subject of hissuperlative rascality. he had forwarded sam， also.
　　on ford’s arrival at the mill， we were employed inpiling lumber， and chopping logs， which occupation wecontinued during the remainder of the summer.




第24章 Chapter VII.(3)


　　we usually spent our sabbaths at the opening， onwhich days our master would gather all his slaves abouthim， and read and expound the scriptures. he soughtto inculcate in our minds feelings of kindness towardseach other， of dependence upon god— setting forththe rewards promised unto those who lead an uprightand prayerful life. seated in the doorway of his house，surrounded by his man-servants and his maid-servants，who looded earnestly into the good man’s face， he spokeof the loving kindness of the creator， and of the life thatis to come. often did the voice of prayer ascend from hislips to heaven， the only sound that broke the solitude ofthe place.
　　in the course of the summer sam became deeplyconvicted， his mind dwelling intensely on the subject ofreligion. his mistress gave him a bible， which he carriedwith him to his work. whatever leisure time was allowedhim， he spent in perusing it， though it was only withgreat difficulty that he could master any part of it. i oftenread to him， a favor which he well repaid me by manyexpressions of gratitude. sam’s piety was frequentlyobserved by white men who came to the mill， and theremark it most generally provoked was， that a man likeford， who allowed his slaves to have bibles， was “not fitto own a nigger.”
　　he， however， lost nothing by his kindness. it is a facti have more than once observed， that those who treatedtheir slaves most leniently， were rewarded by the greatest amount of labor. i know it from my own experience. itwas a source of pleasure to surprise master ford witha greater day’s work than was required， while， undersubsequent masters， there was no prompter to extraeffort but the overseer’s lash.
　　it was the desire of ford’s approving voice thatsuggested to me an idea that resulted to his profit. thelumber we were manufacturing was contracted to bedelivered at lamourie. it had hitherto been transportedby land， and was an important item of expense. indiancreek， upon which the mills were situated， was anarrow but deep stream emptying into bayou boeuf.
　　in some places it was not more than twelve feet wide，and much obstructed with trunks of trees. bayou boeufwas connected with bayou lamourie. i ascertained thedistance from the mills to the point on the latter bayou，where our lumber was to be delivered， was but a fewmiles less by land than by water. provided the creekcould be made navigable for rafts， it occurred to methat the expense of transportation would be materiallydiminished.
　　adam taydem， a little white man who had been asoldier in florida， and had strolled into that distantregion， was foreman and superintendent of the mills.
　　he scouted the idea； but ford， when i laid it beforehim， received it favorably， and permitted me to try theexperiment.
　　having removed the obstructions， i made up a narrow raft， consisting of twelve cribs. at this business i thinki was quite skillful， not having forgotten my experienceyears before on the champlain canal. i labored hard，being extremely anxious to succeed， both from a desireto please my master， and to show adam taydem， that myscheme was not such a visionary one as he incessantlypronounced it. one hand could manage three cribs. itook charge of the forward three， and commenced polingdown the creek. in due time we entered the first bayou，and finally reached our destination in a shorter period oftime than i had anticipated.
　　the arrival of the raft at lamourie created a sensation，while mr. ford loaded me with commendation. on allsides i heard ford’s platt pronounced the “smartestnigger in the pine woods” —in fact i was the fulton ofindian creek. i was not insensible to the praise bestowedupon me， and enjoyed， especially， my triumph overtaydem， whose half-malicious ridicule had stung mypride. from this time the entire control of bringing thelumber to lamourie was placed in my hands until thecontract was fulfilled.
　　indian creek， in its whole length， flows through amagnificent forest. there dwells on its shore a tribe ofindians， a remnant of the chickasaws or chickopees， if iremember rightly. they live in simple huts， ten or twelvefeet square， constructed of pine poles and covered withbark. they subsist principally on the flesh of the deer，the coon， and opossum， all of which are plenty in these woods. sometimes they exchange venison for a little cornand whisky with the planters on the bayous. their usualdress is buckskin breeches and calico hunting shirts offantastic colors， buttoned from belt to chin. they wearbrass rings on their wrists， and in their ears and noses.
http://



第25章 Chapter VII.(4)


　　the dress of the squaws is very similar. they are fond ofdogs and horses—owning many of the latter， of a small，tough breed—and are skillful riders. their bridles， girthsand saddles were made of raw skins of animals； theirstirrups of a certain kind of wood. mounted astride theirponies， men and women， i have seen them dash outinto the woods at the utmost of their speed， followingnarrow winding paths， and dodging trees， in a mannerthat eclipsed the most miraculous feats of civilizedequestrianism. circling away in various directions， theforest echoing and re-echoing with their whoops， theywould presently return at the same dashing， headlongspeed with which they started. their village was onindian creek， known as indian castle， but their rangeextended to the sabine river. occasionally a tribe fromtexas would come over on a visit， and then there wasindeed a carnival in the “great pine woods.” chief of thetribe was cascalla； second in rank， john baltese， his sonin-law； with both of whom， as with many others of thetribe， i became acquainted during my frequent voyagesdown the creek with rafts. sam and myself would oftenvisit them when the day’s task w as done. they wereobedient to the chief； the word of cascalla was their  law. they were a rude but harmless people， and enjoyedtheir wild mode of life. they had little fancy for the opencountry， the cleared lands on the shores of the bayous，but preferred to hide themselves within the shadows ofthe forest. they worshiped the great spirit， loved whisky，and were happy.
　　on one occasion i was present at a dance， when aroving herd from texas had encamped in their village.
　　the entire carcass of a deer was roasting before a largefire， which threw its light a long distance among the treesunder which they were assembled. when they had formedin a ring， men and squaws alternately， a sort of indianfiddle set up an indescribable tune. it was a continuous，melancholy kind of wavy sound， with the slightestpossible variation. at the first note， if indeed there wasmore than one note in the whole tune， they circledaround， trotting after each other， and giving utterance toa guttural， sing-song noise， equally as nonde as themusic of the fiddle. at the end of the third circuit， theywould stop suddenly， whoop as if their lungs would crack，then break from the ring， forming in couples， man andsquaw， each jumping backwards as far as possible fromthe other， then forwards—which graceful feat having beentwice or thrice accomplished， they would form in a ring，and go trotting round again. the best dancer appearedto be considered the one who could whoop the loudest，jump the farthest， and utter the most excruciating noise.
　　at intervals， one or more would leave the dancing circle， and going to the fire， cut from the roasting carcass a sliceof venison.
　　in a hole， shaped like a mortar， cut in the trunk of afallen tree， they pounded corn with a wooden pestle， andof the meal made cake. alternately they danced and ate.
　　thus were the visitors from texas entertained by thedusky sons and daughters of the chicopees， and such isa deion， as i saw it， of an indian ball in the pinewoods of avoyelles.
　　in the autumn， i left the mills， and was employed atthe opening. one day the mistress was urging ford toprocure a loom， in order that sally might commenceweaving cloth for the winter garments of the slaves. hecould not imagine where one was to be found， when isuggested that the easiest way to get one would be tomake it， informing him at the same time， that i was asort of “jack at all trades，” and would attempt it， withhis permission. it was granted very readily， and i wasallowed to go to a neighboring planter’s to inspect onebefore commencing the undertaking. at length it wasfinished and pronounced by sally to be perfect. she couldeasily weave her task of fourteen yards， milk the cows，and have leisure time besides each day. it worked so well，i was continued in the employment of making looms，which were taken down to the plantation on the bayou.
　　at this time one john m. tibeats， a capenter， came tothe opening to do some work on master’s house. i wasdirected to quit the looms and assist him. for two weeks i was in his company， planing and matching boards forceiling， a plastered room being a rare thing in the parishof avoyelles.
　　john m. tibeats was the opposite of ford in allrespects. he was a small， crabbed， quick-tempered，spiteful man. he had no fixed residence that i ever heardof， but passed from one plantation to another， whereverhe could find employment. he was without standing inthe community， not esteemed by white men， nor evenrespected by slaves. he was ignorant， withal， and of arevengeful disposition. he left the parish long beforei did， and i know not whether he is at present alive ordead. certain it is， it was a most unlucky day for me thatbrought us together. during my residence with masterford i had seen only the bright side of slavery. his was noheavy hand crushing us to the earth. he pointed upwards，and with benign and cheering words addressed us as hisfellow-mortals， accountable， like himself， to the makerof us all. i think of him with affection， and had my familybeen with me， could have borne his gentle servitude，without murmuring， all my days. but clouds weregathering in the horizon —forerunners of a pitiless stormthat was soon to break over me. i was doomed to enduresuch bitter trials as the poor slave only knows， and to leadno more the comparatively happy life which i had led inthe “great pine woods.”
www．Ｌｚｕｏｗｅｎ．ｃｏｍ



第26章 Chapter VIII.(1)


　　william ford unfortunately became embarrassed inhis pecuniary affairs. a heavy judgement was renderedagainst him in consequence of his having becomesecurity for his brother， franklin ford， residing on redriver， above alexandria， and who had failed to meet hisliabilities. he was also indebted to john m. tibeats to aconsiderable amount in consideration of his services inbuilding the mills on indian creek， and also a weavinghouse，corn-mill and other erections on the plantationat bayou boeuf， not yet completed. it was thereforenecessary， in order to meet these demands， to dispose ofeighteen slaves， myself among the number. seventeen ofthem， including sam and harry， were purchased by petercompton， a planter also residing on red river.
　　i was sold to tibeats， in consequence， undoubtedly，of my slight skill as a carpenter. this was in the winterof 1842. the deed of myself from freeman to ford， asi ascertained from the public records in new-orleanson my return， was dated june 23d， 1841. at the time ofmy sale to tibeats， the price agreed to be given for mebeing more than the debt， ford took a chattel mortgageof four hundred dollars. i am indebted for my life， as willhereafter be seen， to that mortgage.
　　i bade farewell to my good friends at the opening， anddeparted with my new master tibeats. we went downto the plantation on bayou boeuf， distant twenty-sevenmiles from the pine woods， to complete the unfinishedcontract. bayou boeuf is a sluggish， winding stream—oneof those stagnant bodies of water common in that region，setting back from red river. it stretches from a pointnot far from alexandra， in a south-easterly direction，and following its tortuous course， is more than fifty milesin length. large cotton and sugar plantations line eachshore， extending back to the borders of interminableswamps. it is alive with aligators， rendering it unsafefor swine， or unthinking slave children to stroll alongits banks. upon a bend in this bayou， a short distancefrom cheneyville， was situated the plantation of madamford—her brother， peter tanner， a great landholder，living on the opposite side.
　　on my arrival at bayou boeuf， i had the pleasure ofmeeting eliza， whom i had not seen for several months.
　　she had not pleased mrs. ford， being more occupiedin brooding over her sorrows than in attending to herbusiness， and had， in consequence， been sent down towork in the field on the plantation. she had grown feebleand emaciated， and was still mourning for her children.
　　she asked me if i had forgotten them， and a great manytimes inquired if i still remembered how handsome littleemily was—how much randall loved her—and wonderedif they were living still， and where the darlings could then be. she had sunk beneath the weight of an excessive grief.
　　her drooping form and hollow cheeks too plainly indicatedthat she had well nigh reached the end of her weary road.
　　ford’s overseer on this plantation， and who had theexclusive charge of it， was a mr. chapin， a kindly-disposedman， and a native of pennsylvania. in common withothers， he held tibeats in light estimation， which fact， inconnection with the four hundred dollar mortgage wasfortunate for me.
　　i was now compelled to labor very hard. from earliestdawn until late at night， i was not allowed to be a momentidle. notwithstanding which， tibeats was never satisfied.
　　he was continually cursing and complaining. he neverspoke to me a kind word. i was his faithful slave， andearned him large wages every day， and yet i went to mycabin nightly， loaded with abuse and stinging epithets.
　　we had completed the corn mill， the kitchen， an soforth， and were at work upon the weaving-house， when iwas guilty of an act， in that state punishable with death.
　　it was my first fight with tibeats. the weaving-house wewere erecting stood in the orchard a few rods from theresidence of chapin， or the “great house，” as it was called.
　　one night， having worked until it was too dark to see， iwas ordered by tibeats to rise very early in the morning，procure a keg of nails from chapin， and commenceputting on the clapboards. i retired to the cabin extremelytired， and having cooked a supper of bacon and corncake， and conversed a while with eliza， who occupied the091
　　same cabin， as also did lawson and his wife mary， anda slave named bristol， laid down upon the ground floor，little dreaming of the sufferings that awaited me on themorrow. before daylight i was on the piazza of the “greathouse，” awaiting the appearance of overseer chapin.
　　to have aroused him from his slumbers and stated myerrand， would have been an unpardonable boldness. atlength he came out. taking off my hat， i informed himmaster tibeats had directed me to call upon him for akeg of nails. going into the store-room， he rolled it out， atthe same time saying， if tibeats preferred a different size，he would endeavor to furnish them， but that i might usethose until further directed. then mounting his horse，which stood saddled and bridled at the door， he rodeaway into the field， whither the slaves had preceded him，while i took the keg on my shoulder， and proceeding tothe weaving-house， broke in the head， and commencednailing on the clapboards.
　　as the day began to open， tibeats came out of thehouse to where i was， hard at work. he seemed to be thatmorning even more morose and disagreeable than usual.
　　he was my master， entitled by law to my flesh and blood，and to exercise over me such tyrannical control as hismean nature prompted； but there was no law that couldprevent my looking upon him with intense contempt. idespised both his disposition and his intellect. i had justcome round to the keg for a further supply of nails， as hereached the weaving-house.
　　“i thought i told you to commence putting on weatherboardsthis morning，” he remarked.
　　“yes， master， and i am about it，” i replied.
　　“where？” he demanded.
　　“on the other side，” was my answer.
   



第27章 Chapter VIII.(2)


　　he walked round to the other side， examined my workfor a while， muttering to himself in a fault-finding tone.
　　“didn’t i tell you last night to get a keg of nails ofchapin？” he broke forth again.
　　“yes， master， and so i did； and overseer said he wouldget another size for you， if you wanted them， when hecame back from the field.”
　　tibeats walked to the keg， looked a moment at thecontents， then kicked it violently. coming towards me ina great passion， he exclaimed，
　　“g—d d—n you！ i thought you knowed something.”
　　i made answer： “i tried to do as you told me， master.
　　i didn’t mean anything wrong. overseer said—” but heinterrupted me with such a flood of curses that i wasunable to finish the sentence. at length he ran towardsthe house， and going to the piazza， took down one of theoverseer’s whips. the whip had a short wooden stock，braided over with leather， and was loaded at the butt.
　　the lash was three feet long， or thereabouts， and made ofraw-hide strands.
　　at first i was somewhat frightened， and my impulsewas to run. there was no one about except rachel， thecook， and chapin’s wife， and neither of them were to be seen. the rest were in the field. i knew he intended towhip me， and it was the first time any one had attemptedit since my arrival at avoyelles. i felt， moreover， that ihad been faithful—that i was guilty of no wrong whatever，and deserved commendation rather than punishment.
　　my fear changed to anger， and before he reached me ihad made up my mind fully not to be whipped， let theresult be life or death.
　　winding the lash around his hand， and taking hold ofthe small end of the stock， he walked up to me， and with amalignant look， ordered me to strip.
　　“master tibeats， said i， looking him boldly in theface，” i will not. “i was about to say something further injustification， but with concentrated vengeance， he sprangupon me， seizing me by the throat with one hand， raisingthe whip with the other， in the act of striking. before theblow descended， however， i had caught him by the collarof the coat， and drawn him closely to me. reaching down，i seized him by the ankle， and pushing him back with theother hand， he fell over on the ground. putting one armaround his leg， and holding it to my breast， so that hishead and shoulders only touched the ground， i placedmy foot upon his neck. he was completely in my power.
　　my blood was up. it seemed to course through my veinslike fire. in the frenzy of my madness i snatched the whipfrom his hand. he struggled with all his power； swore thati should not live to see another day； and that he wouldtear out my heart. but his struggles and his threats were alike in vain. i cannot tell how many times i struck him.
　　blow after blow fell fast and heavy upon his wrigglingform. at length he screamed—cried murder—and at lastthe blasphemous tyrant called on god for mercy. but hewho had never shown mercy did not receive it. the stiffstock of the whip warped round his cringing body untilmy right arm ached.
　　until this time i had been too busy to look about me.
　　desisting for a moment， i saw mrs. chapin looking fromthe window， and rachel standing in the kitchen door.
　　their attitudes expressed the utmost excitement andalarm. his screams had been heard in the field. chapinwas coming as fast as he could ride. i struck him a blowor two more， then pushed him from me with such a welldirectedkick that he went rolling over on the ground.
　　rising to his feet， and brushing the dirt from his hair，he stood looking at me， pale with rage. we gazed at eachother in silence. not a word was uttered until chapingalloped up to us.
　　“what is the matter？” he cried out.
　　“master tibeats wants to whip me for using the nailsyou gave me，” i replied.
　　“what is the matter with the nails？” he inquired， turningto tibeats.
　　tibeats answered to the effect that they were too large，paying little heed， however， to chapin’s question， but stillkeeping his snakish eyes fastened maliciously on me.
　　“i am overseer here”， chapin began. “i told platt to take them and use them， and if they were not of theproper size i would get others on returning from the field.
　　it is not his fault. besides， i shall furnish such nails as iplease. i hope you will understand that， mr. tibeats.”
　　tibeats made no reply， but， grinding his teeth andshaking his fist， swore he would have satisfaction， andthat it was not half over yet. thereupon he walked away，followed by the overseer， and entered the house， thelatter talking to him all the while in a suppressed tone，and with earnest gestures.
　　i remained where i was， doubting whether it wasbetter to fly or abide the result， whatever it might be.
　　presently tibeats came out of the house， and， saddlinghis horse， the only property he possessed besides myself，departed on the road to chenyville.
　　when he was gone， chapin came out， visibly excited，telling me not to stir， not to attempt to leave theplantation on any account whatever. he then went tothe kitchen， and calling rachel out， conversed with hersome time. coming back， he again charged me with greatearnestness not to run， saying my master was a rascal；that he had left on no good errand， and that there mightbe trouble before night. but at all events， he insisted uponit， i must not stir.
下…… 书 ……网



第28章 Chapter VIII.(3)


　　as i stood there， feelings of unutterable agonyoverwhelmed me. i was conscious that i had subjectedmyself to unimaginable punishment. the reaction thatfollowed my extreme ebullition of anger produced the
　　most painful sensations of regret. an unfriended， helplessslave—what could i do， what could i say， to justify， inthe remotest manner， the heinous act i had committed，of resenting a white man’s contumely and abuse. itried to pray—i tried to beseech my heavenly father tosustain me in my sore extremity， but emotion chokedmy utterance， and i could only bow my head upon myhands and weep. for at least an hour i remained in thissituation， finding relief only in tears， when， looking up， ibeheld tibeats， accompanied by two horsemen， comingdown the bayou. they rode into the yard， jumped fromtheir horses， and approached me with large whips， one ofthem also carrying a coil of rope.
　　“cross your hands，” commanded tibeats， with theaddition of such a shuddering expression of blasphemy asis not decorous to repeat.
　　“you need not bind me， master tibeats， i am ready togo with you anywhere，” said i.
　　one of his companions then stepped forward， swearingif i made the least resistance he would break my head—he would tear me limb from limb—he would cut myblack throat—and giving wide scope to other similarexpressions. perceiving any importunity altogether vain，i crossed my hands， submitting humbly to whateverdisposition they might please to make of me. thereupontibeats tied my wrists， drawing the rope around themwith his utmost strength. then he bound my ankles in thesame manner. in the meantime the other two had slipped097
　　a cord within my elbows， running it across my back， andtying it firmly. it was utterly impossible to move handor foot. with a remaining piece of rope tibeats made anawkward noose， and placed it about my neck.
　　“now， then，” inquired one of tibeats’ companions，“where shall we hang the nigger？”
　　chapin rescues solomon from hanging.
　　one proposed such a limb， extending from the bodyof a peach tree， near the spot where we were standing.
　　his comrade objected to it， alleging it would break， andproposed another. finally they fixed upon the latter.
　　during this conversation， and all the time they werebinding me， i uttered not a word. overseer chapin，during the progress of the scene， was walking hastily backand forth on the piazza. rachel was crying by the kitchendoor， and mrs. chapin was still looking from the window.
　　hope died within my heart. surely my time had come.
　　i should never behold the light of another day—neverbehold the faces of my children—the sweet anticipationi had cherished with such fondness. i should that hourstruggle through the fearful agonies of death！ none wouldmourn for me—none revenge me. soon my form would bemouldering in that distant soil， or， perhaps， be cast to theslimy reptiles that filled the stagnant waters of the bayou！
　　tears flowed down my cheeks， but they only afforded asubject of insulting comment for my executioners.
　　at length， as they were dragging me towards the tree，chapin， who had momentarily disappeared from thepiazza， came out of the house and walked towards us. hehad a pistol in each hand， and as near as i can now recallto mind， spoke in a firm， determined manner， as follows：
　　“gentlemen， i have a few words to say. you had betterlisten to them. whoever moves that slave another footfrom where he stands is a dead man. in the first place， hedoes not deserve this treatment. it is a shame to murder099
　　him in this manner. i never knew a more faithful boythan platt. you， tibeats， are in the fault yourself. you arepretty much of a scoundrel， and i know it， and you richlydeserve the flogging you have received. in the next place，i have been overseer on this plantation seven years， and，in the absence of william ford， am master here. my dutyis to protect his interests， and that duty i shall perform.
　　you are not responsible—you are a worthless fellow. fordholds a mortgage on platt of four hundred dollars. if youhang him he loses his debt. until that is canceled youhave no right to take his life. you have no right to takeit any way. there is a law for the slave as well as for thewhite man. you are no better than a murderer.
　　“as for you，” addressing cook and ramsay， a coupleof overseers from neighboring plantations， “as for you—begone！ if you have any regard for your own safety， i say，begone.”
　　cook and ramsay， without a further word， mountedtheir horses and rode away. tibeats， in a few minutes，evidently in fear， and overawed by the decided toneof chapin， sneaked off like a coward， as he was， andmounting his horse， followed his companions.
　　i remained standing where i was， still bound， with therope around my neck. as soon as they were gone， chapincalled rachel， ordering her to run to the field， and telllawson to hurry to the house without delay， and bringthe brown mule with him， an animal much prized for itsunusual fleetness. presently the boy appeared.
　　“lawson，” said chapin， “you must go to the pinewoods. tell your master ford to come here at once —thathe must not delay a single moment. tell him they aretrying to murder platt. now hurry， boy. be at the pinewoods by noon if you kill the mule.”
　　chapin stepped into the house and wrote a pass. whenhe returned， lawson was at the door， mounted on hismule. receiving the pass， he plied the whip right smartlyto the beast， dashed out of the yard， and turning up thebayou on a hard gallop， in less time than it has taken meto describe the scene， was out of sight.
www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ  www.7wenxＵe.com



第29章 Chapter IX.(1)


　　as the sun approached the meridian that day it becameinsufferably warm. its hot rays scorched the ground. theearth almost blistered the foot that stood upon it. i waswithout coat or hat， standing bareheaded， exposed to itsburning blaze. great drops of perspiration rolled downmy face， drenching the scanty apparel wherewith i wasclothed. over the fence， a very little way off， the peachtrees cast their cool， delicious shadows on the grass. iwould gladly have given a long year of service to havebeen enabled to exchange the heated oven， as it were，wherein i stood， for a seat beneath their branches. buti was yet bound， the rope still dangling from my neck，and standing in the same tracks where tibeats and hiscomrades left me. i could not move an inch， so firmly hadi been bound. to have been enabled to lean against theweaving house would have been a luxury indeed. but itwas far beyond my reach， though distant less than twentyfeet. i wanted to lie down， but knew i could not riseagain. the ground was so parched and boiling hot i wasaware it would but add to the discomfort of my situation.
　　if i could have only moved my position， however slightly，it would have been relief unspeakable. but the hot rays ofa southern sun， beating all the long summer day on my bare head， produced not half the suffering i experiencedfrom my aching limbs. my wrists and ankles， and thecords of my legs and arms began to swell， burying therope that bound them into the swollen flesh.
　　all day chapin walked back and forth upon the stoop，but not once approached me. he appeared to be in a stateof great uneasiness， looking first towards me， and then upthe road， as if expecting some arrival every moment. hedid not go to the field， as was his custom. it was evidentfrom his manner that he supposed tibeats would returnwith more and better armed assistance， perhaps， to renewthe quarrel， and it was equally evident he had preparedhis mind to defend my life at whatever hazard. why hedid not relieve me—why he suffered me to remain inagony the whole weary day， i never knew. it was not forwant of sympathy， i am certain. perhaps he wished fordto see the rope about my neck， and the brutal mannerin which i had been bound； perhaps his interferencewith another’s property in which he had no legal interestmight have been a trespass， which would have subjectedhim to the penalty of the law. why tibeats was all dayabsent was another mystery i never could divine. heknew well enough that chapin would not harm himunless he persisted in his design against me. lawson toldme afterwards， that， as he passed the plantation of johndavid cheney， he saw the three， and that they turned andlooked after him as he flew by. i think his suppositionwas， that lawson had been sent out by overseer chapin to arouse the neighboring planters， and to call on themto come to his assistance. he， therefore， undoubtedly，acted on the principle， that “discretion is the better partof valor，” and kept away.
　　but whatever motive may have governed the cowardlyand malignant tyrant， it is of no importance. there i stillstood in the noon-tide sun， groaning with pain. fromlong before daylight i had not eaten a morsel. i wasgrowing faint from pain， and thirst， and hunger. onceonly， in the very hottest portion of the day， rachel， halffearful she was acting contrary to the overseer’s wishes，ventured to me， and held a cup of water to my lips. thehumble creature never knew， nor could she comprehendif she had heard them， the blessings i invoked upon her，for that balmy draught. she could only say， “oh， platt，how i do pity you，” and then hastened back to her laborsin the kitchen.
　　never did the sun move so slowly through the heavens—never did it shower down such fervent and fiery rays， asit did that day. at least， so it appeared to me. what mymeditations were—the innumerable thoughts thatthronged through my distracted brain—i will not attemptto give expression to. suffice it to say， during the wholelong day i came not to the conclusion， even once， thatthe southern slave， fed， clothed， whipped and protectedby his master， is happier than the free colored citizenof the north. to that conclusion i have never sincearrived. there are many， however， even in the northern states， benevolent and well-disposed men， who willpronounce my opinion erroneous， and gravely proceed tosubstantiate the assertion with an argument. alas！ theyhave never drank， as i have， from the bitter cup of slavery.
　　just at sunset my heart leaped with unbounded joy， asford came riding into the yard， his horse covered withfoam. chapin met him at the door， and after conversing ashort time， he walked directly to me.
　　“poor platt， you are in a bad state，” was the only expressionthat escaped his lips.
　　“thank god！” said i， “thank god， master ford， thatyou have come at last.”
　　drawing a knife from his pocket， he indignantly cut thecord from my wrists， arms， and ankles， and slipped thenoose from my neck. i attempted to walk， but staggeredlike a drunken man， and fell partially to the ground.
　　ford returned immediately to the house， leaving mealone again. as he reached the piazza， tibeats and his twofriends rode up. a long dialogue followed. i could hearthe sound of their voices， the mild tones of ford minglingwith the angry accents of tibeats， but was unable todistinguish what was said. finally the three departedagain， apparently not well pleased.
  www.7wenxＵe.com



第30章 Chapter IX.(2)


　　i endeavored to raise the hammer， thinking to showford how willing i was to work， by proceeding with mylabors on the weaving house， but it fell from my nervelesshand. at dark i crawled into the cabin， and laid down. iwas in great misery—all sore and swollen—the slightest  movement producing excruciating suffering. soon thehands came in from the field. rachel， hen she wentafter lawson， had told them what had happened. elizaand mary broiled me a piece of bacon， but my appetitewas gone. then they scorched some corn meal and madecoffee. it was all that i could take. eliza consoled me andwas very kind. it was not long before the cabin was full ofslaves. they gathered round me， asking many questionsabout the difficulty with tibeats in the morning—andthe particulars of all the occurrences of the day. thenrachel came in， and in her simple language， repeated itover again—dwelling emphatically on the kick that senttibeats rolling over on the ground—whereupon there wasa general titter throughout the crowd. then she describedhow chapin walked out with his pistols and rescued me，and how master ford cut the ropes with his knife， just asif he was mad.
　　by this time lawson had returned. he had to regalethem with an account of his trip to the pine woods—how thebrown mule bore him faster than a “streak o’ lightnin” —howhe astonished everybody as he flew along—how masterford started right away—how he said platt was a goodnigger， and they shouldn’t kill him， concluding withpretty strong intimations that there was not anotherhuman being in the wide world， who could have createdsuch a universal sensation on the road， or performed sucha marvelous john gilpin feat， as he had done that day onthe brown mule.
　　the kind creatures loaded me with the expression oftheir sympathy—saying tibeats was a hard， cruel man，and hoping “massa ford” would get me back again. in thismanner they passed the time， discussing， chatting， talkingover end over again the exciting affair， until suddenlychapin presented himself at the cabin door and called me.
　　“platt，” said he， “you will sleep on the floor in the greathouse to-night； bring your blanket with you.”
　　i arose as quickly as i was able， took my blanket in myhand， and followed him. on the way he informed me thathe should not wonder if tibeats was back again beforemorning—that he intended to kill me—and that he did notmean he should do it without witnesses. had he stabbedme to the heart in the presence of a hundred slaves， notone of them， by the laws of louisiana， could have givenevidence against him. i laid down on the floor in the “greathouse” —the first and the last time such a sumptuousresting place was granted me during my twelve yearsof bondage—and tried to sleep. near midnight the dogbegan to bark. chapin arose， looked from the window，but could discover nothing. at length the dog was quiet.
　　as he returned to his room， he said，
　　“i believe， platt， that scoundrel is skulking about thepremises somewhere. if the dog barks again， and i amsleeping， wake me.”
　　i promised to do so. after the lapse of an hour or more，the dog re-commenced his clamor， running towards thegate， then back again， all the while barking furiously.
　　chapin was out of bed without waiting to be called.
　　on this occasion， he stepped forth upon the piazza， andremained standing there a considerable length of time.
　　nothing， however， was to be seen， and the dog returnedto his kennel. we were not disturbed again duringthe night. the excessive pain that i suffered， and thedread of some impending danger， prevented any restwhatever. whether or not tibeats did actually returnto the plantation that night， seeking an opportunity towreak his vengeance upon me， is a secret known only tohimself， perhaps. i thought then， however， and have thestrong impression still， that he was there. at all events，he had the disposition of an assassin—cowering beforea brave man’s words， but ready to strike his helpless orunsuspecting victim in the back， as i had reason afterwardsto know.
　　at daylight in the morning， i arose， sore and weary，having rested little. nevertheless， after partakingbreakfast， which mary and eliza had prepared for mein the cabin， i proceeded to the weaving-house andcommenced the labors of another day. it was chapin’spractice， as it is the practice of overseers generally，immediately on arising， to bestride his horse， alwayssaddled and bridled and ready for him—the particularbusiness of some slave—and ride into the field. thismorning， on the contrary， he came to the weaving-house，asking if i had seen anything of tibeats yet. replyingin the negative， he remarked there was something not right about the fellow—there was bad blood in him—thati must keep a sharp watch of him， or he would do mewrong some day when i least expected it.
　　while he was yet speaking， tibeats rode in， hitchedhis horse， and entered the house. i had little fear of himwhile ford and chapin were at hand， but they could notbe near me always.
　　oh！ how heavily the weight of slavery pressed uponme then. i must toil day after day， endure abuse andtaunts and scoffs， sleep on the hard ground， live on thecoarsest fare， and not only this， but live the slave of ablood-seeking wretch， of whom i must stand henceforthin continued fear and dread. why had i not died in myyoung years—before god had given me children to loveand live for？ what unhappiness and suffering and sorrowit would have prevented. i sighed for liberty； but thebondman’s chain was round me， and could not be shakenoff. i could only gaze wistfully towards the north， andthink of the thousands of miles that stretched betweenme and the soil of freedom， over which a black freemanmay not pass.
　　tibeats， in the course of half an hour， walked over tothe weaving-house， looked at me sharply， then returnedwithout saying anything. most of the forenoon he saton the piazza， reading a newspaper and conversing withford. after dinner， the latter left for the pine woods， andit was indeed with regret that i beheld him depart fromthe plantation.
　　once more during the day tibeats came to me， gaveme some order， and returned.
  



第31章 Chapter IX.(3)


　　during the week the weaving-house was completed—tibeats in the meantime making no allusion whateverto the difficulty—when i was informed he had hired meto peter tanner， to work under another carpenter by thename of myers. this announcement was received withgratification， as any place was desirable that would relieveme of his hateful presence.
　　peter tanner， as the reader has already been informed，lived on the opposite shore， and was the brother ofmistress ford. he is one of the most extensive planterson bayou boeuf， and owns a large number of slaves.
　　over i went to tanner’s， joyfully enough. he had heardof my late difficulties—in fact， i ascertained the floggingof tibeats was soon blazoned far and wide. this affair，together with my rafting experiment， had rendered mesomewhat notorious. more than once i heard it said thatplatt ford， now platt tibeats—a slave’s name changes withhis change of master—was “a devil of a nigger.” but i wasdestined to make a still further noise， as will presently beseen， throughout the little world of bayou boeuf.
　　peter tanner endeavored to impress upon me the ideathat he was quite severe， though i could perceive therewas a vein of good humor in the old fellow， after all.
　　“you’re the nigger，” he said to me on my arrival— “you’rethe nigger that flogged your master， eh？ you’re the niggerthat kicks， and holds carpenter tibeats by the leg， and  wallops him， are ye？ i’d like to see you hold me by theleg—i should. you’re a ’portant character—you’re a greatnigger—very remarkable nigger， ain’t ye？ i’d lash you—i’dtake the tantrums out of ye. jest take hold of my leg， ifyou please. none of your pranks here， my boy， rememberthat. now go to work， you kickin’ rascal，” concluded petertanner， unable to suppress a half-comical grin at his ownwit and sarcasm.
　　after listening to this salutation， i was taken charge ofby myers， and labored under his direction for a month， tohis and my own satisfaction.
　　like william ford， his brother-in-law， tanner wasin the habit of reading the bible to his slaves on thesabbath， but in a somewhat different spirit. he was animpressive commentator on the new-testament. thefirst sunday after my coming to the plantation， he calledthem together， and began to read the twelfth chapterof luke. when he came to the 47th verse， he lookeddeliberately around him， and continued— “and thatservant which knew his lord’s will，” —here he paused，looking around more deliberately than before， and againproceeded— “which knew his lord’s will， and preparednot himself” —here was another pause— “prepared nothimself， neither did according to his will， shall be beatenwith many stripes.”
　　“d’ye hear that？” demanded peter， emphatically.
　　“stripes，” he repeated， slowly and distinctly， taking off hisspectacles， preparatory to making a few remarks.
　　“that nigger that don’t take care—that don’t obey hislord—that’s his master—d’ye see？—that ’erenigger shallbe beaten with many stripes. now， ‘many’ signifies agreat many—forty， a hundred， a hundred and fifty lashes.
　　that’s scripter！” and so peter continued to elucidate thesubject for a great length of time， much to the edificationof his sable audience.
　　at the conclusion of the exercises， calling up three ofhis slaves， warner， will and major or， he cried out tome—
　　“here， platt， you held tibeats by the legs； now i’ll see ifyou can hold these rascals in the same way， till i get backfrom meetin’.”
　　thereupon he ordered them to the stocks—a commonthing on plantations in the red river country. the stocksare formed of two planks， the lower one made fast at theends to two short posts， driven firmly into the ground.
　　at regular distances half circles are cut in the upperedge. the other plank is fastened to one of the posts by ahinge， so that it can be opened or shut down， in the samemanner as the blade of a pocket-knife is shut or opened.
　　in the lower edge of the upper plank corresponding halfcircles are also cut， so that when they close， a row of holesis formed large enough to admit a negro’s leg above theankle， but not large enough to enable him to draw outhis foot. the other end of the upper plank， opposite thehinge， is fastened to its post by lock and key. the slave ismade to sit upon the ground， when the uppermost prankis elevated， his legs， just above the ankles， placed in thesub-half circles， and shutting it down again， and lockingit， he is held secure and fast. very often the neck insteadof the ankle is enclosed. in this manner they are heldduring the operation of whipping.
　　warner， will and major， according to tanner’s accountof them， were melon-stealing， sabbath-breaking niggers，and not approving of such wickedness， he felt it his dutyto put them in the stocks. handing me the key， himself，myers， mistress tanner and the children entered thecarriage and drove away to church at cheneyville. whenthey were gone， the boys begged me to let them out.
　　i felt sorry to see them sitting on the hot ground， andremembered my own sufferings in the sun. upon theirpromise to return to the stocks at any moment they wererequired to do so， i consented to release them. gratefulfor the lenity shown them， and in order in some measureto repay it， they could do no less， of course， than pilot meto the melon-patch. shortly before tanner’s return， theywere in the stocks again. finally he drove up， and lookingat the boys， said， with a chuckle， —
　　“aha！ ye havn’t been strolling about much to-day， anyway. i’ll teach you what’s what. i’ll tire ye of eating watermelonson the lord’s day， ye sabbath-breaking niggers.”
　　peter tanner prided himself upon his strict religiousobservances： he was a deacon in the church.
　　but i have now reached a point in the progress of mynarrative， when it becomes necessary to turn away from113
　　these light deions， to the more grave and weightymatter of the second battle with master tibeats， and theflight through the great pacoudrie swamp.
   http://www.xiabook．com



第32章 Chapter X.(1)


　　at the end of a month， my services being no longerrequired at tanner’s i was sent over the bayou again tomy master， whom i found engaged in building the cottonpress. this was situated at some distance from the greathouse， in a rather retired place. i commenced workingonce more in company with tibeats， being entirely alonewith him most part of the time. i remembered the wordsof chapin， his precautions， his advice to beware， lest insome unsuspecting moment he might injure me. theywere always in my mind， so that i lived in a most uneasystate of apprehension and fear. one eye was on my work，the other on my master. i determined to give him nocause of offence， to work still more diligently， if possible，than i had done， to bear whatever abuse he might heapupon me， save bodily injury， humbly and patiently，hoping thereby to soften in some degree his mannertowards me， until the blessed time might come when ishould be delivered from his clutches.
　　the third morning after my return， chapin left theplantation for cheneyville， to be absent until night.
　　tibeats， on that morning， was attacked with one of thoseperiodical fits of spleen and ill-humor to which he wasfrequently subject， rendering him still more disagreeableand venomous than usual.
　　it was about nine o’clock in the forenoon， when iwas busily employed with the jack-plane on one of thesweeps. tibeats was standing by the work-bench， fittinga handle into the chisel， with which he had been engagedpreviously in cutting the thread of the screw.
　　“you are not planing that down enough，” said he.
　　“it is just even with the line，” i replied.
　　“you’re a d—d liar，” he exclaimed passionately.
　　“oh， well， master，” i said， mildly， “i will plane it downmore if you say so，” at the same time proceeding to doas i supposed he desired. before one shaving had beenremoved， however， he cried out， saying i had now planedit too deep—it was too small—i had spoiled the sweepentirely. then followed curses and imprecations. i hadendeavored to do exactly as he directed， but nothingwould satisfy the unreasonable man. in silence and indread i stood by the sweep， holding the jack-plane in myhand， not knowing what to do， and not daring to be idle.
　　his anger grew more and more violent， until， finally，with an oath， such a bitter， frightful oath as only tibeatscould utter， he seized a hatchet from the work-benchand darted towards me， swearing he would cut my headopen.
　　it was a moment of life or death. the sharp， brightblade of the hatchet glittered in the sun. in anotherinstant it would be buried in my brain， and yet in thatinstant—so quick will a man’s thoughts come to him insuch a fearful strait—i reasoned with myself. if i stood still， my doom was certain； if i fled， ten chances to onethe hatchet， flying from his hand with a too-deadly andunerring aim， would strike me in the back. there wasbut one course to take. springing towards him with allmy power， and meeting him full half-way， before hecould bring down the blow， with one hand i caught hisuplifted arm， with the other seized him by the throat. westood looking each other in the eyes. in his i could seemurder. i felt as if i had a serpent by the neck， watchingthe slightest relaxation of my gripe， to coil itself roundmy body， crushing and stinging it to death. i thought toscream aloud， trusting that some ear might catch thesound—but chapin was away； the hands were in the field；there was no living soul in sight or hearing.
　　the good genius， which thus far through life has savedme from the hands of violence， at that moment suggesteda lucky thought. with a vigorous and sudden kick， thatbrought him on one knee， with a groan， i released myhold upon his throat， snatched the hatchet， and cast itbeyond reach.
　　frantic with rage， maddened beyond control， he seizeda white oak stick， five feet long， perhaps， and as large incircumference as his hand could grasp， which was lyingon the ground. again he rushed towards me， and againi met him， seized him about the waist， and being thestronger of the two， bore him to the earth. while in thatposition i obtained possession of the stick， and rising，cast it from me， also.
　　he likewise arose and ran for the broad-axe， on thework-bench. fortunately， there was a heavy plank lyingupon its broad blade， in such a manner that he could notextricate it， before i had sprung upon his back. pressinghim down closely and heavily on the plank， so that theaxe was held more firmly to its place， i endeavored， but invain， to break his grasp upon the handle. in that positionwe remained some minutes.
　　there have been hours in my unhappy life， many ofthem， when the contemplation of death as the end ofearthly sorrow—of the grave as a resting place for thetired and worn out body—has been pleasant to dwellupon. but such contemplations vanish in the hour ofperil. no man， in his full strength， can stand undismayed，in the presence of the “king of terrors.” life is dear toevery living thing； the worm that crawls upon the groundwill struggle for it. at that moment it was dear to me，enslaved and treated as i was.
　　not able to unloose his hand， once more i seized himby the throat， and this time， with a vice-like gripe thatsoon relaxed his hold. he became pliant and unstrung.
　　his face， that had been white with passion， was now blackfrom suffocation. those small serpent eyes that spat suchvenom， were now full of horror—two great white orbsstarting from their sockets！
　　there was “a lurking devil” in my heart that promptedme to kill the human blood-hound on the spot—to retainthe gripe on his accursed throat till the breath of life was gone！ i dared not murder him， and i dared not let himlive. if i killed him， my life must pay the forfeit—if helived， my life only would satisfy his vengeance. a voicewithin whispered me to fly. to be a wanderer amongthe swamps， a fugitive and a vagabond on the face of theearth， was preferable to the life that i was leading.
www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭwww.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ



第33章 Chapter X.(2)


　　my resolution was soon formed， and swinging himfrom the work-bench to the ground， i leaped a fence nearby， and hurried across the plantation， passing the slavesat work in the cotton field. at the end of a quarter of amile i reached the wood-pasture， and it was a short timeindeed that i had been running it. climbing on to a highfence， i could see the cotton press， the great house， andthe space between. it was a conspicuous position， fromwhence the whole plantation was in view. i saw tibeatscross the field towards the house， and enter it—then hecame out， carrying his saddle， and presently mounted hishorse and galloped away.
　　i was desolate， but thankful. thankful that my life wasspared， —desolate and discouraged with the prospectbefore me. what would become of me？ who wouldbefriend me？ whither should i fly？ oh， god！ thou whogavest me life， and implanted in my bosom the love oflife who filled it with emotions such as other men， thycreatures， have， do not forsake me. have pity on the poorslave—let me not perish. if thou cost not protect me， iam lost—lost！ such supplications， silently and unuttered，ascended from my inmost heart to heaven. but there was no answering voice—no sweet， low tone， comingdown from on high， whispering to my soul， “it is i， benot afraid.” i was the forsaken of god， it seemed—thedespised and hated of men！
　　in about three-fourths of an hour several of the slavesshouted and made signs for me to run. presently， lookingup the bayou， i saw tibeats and two others on horseback，coming at a fast gait， followed by a troop of dogs.
　　there were as many as eight or ten. distant as i was， iknew them. they belonged on the adjoining plantation.
　　the dogs used on bayou boeuf for hunting slaves area kind of blood-hound， but a far more savage breedthan is found in the northern states. they will attacka negro， at their master’s bidding， and cling to him asthe common bull-dog will cling to a four footed animal.
　　frequently their loud bay is heard in the swamps， andthen there is speculation as to what point the runawaywill be overhauled—the same as a new-york hunter stopsto listen to the hounds coursing along the hillsides， andsuggests to his companion that the fox will be taken atsuch a place. i never knew a slave escaping with his lifefrom bayou boeuf. one reason is， they are not allowed tolearn the art of swimming， and are incapable of crossingthe most inconsiderable stream. in their flight they cango in no direction but a little way without coming to abayou， when the inevitable alternative is presented， ofbeing drowned or overtaken by the dogs. in youth i hadpracticed in the clear streams that flow through my native120
　　district， until i had become an expert swimmer， and feltat home in the watery element.
　　i stood upon the fence until the dogs had reachedthe cotton press. in an instant more， their long， savageyells announced they were on my track. leaping downfrom my position， i ran towards the swamp. fear gaveme strength， and i exerted it to the utmost. every fewmoments i could hear the yelpings of the dogs. they weregaining upon me. every howl was nearer and nearer.
　　each moment i expected they would spring upon myback—expected to feel their long teeth sinking into myflesh. there were so many of them， i knew they wouldtear me to pieces， that they would worry me， at once， todeath. i gasped for breath—gasped forth a half-uttered，choking prayer to the almighty to save me—to give mestrength to reach some wide， deep bayou where i couldthrow them off the track， or sink into its waters. presentlyi reached a thick palmetto bottom. as i fled throughthem they made a loud rustling noise， not loud enough，however， to drown the voices of the dogs.
　　continuing my course due south， as nearly as i canjudge， i came at length to water just over shoe. thehounds at that moment could not have been five rodsbehind me. i could hear them crashing and plungingthrough the palmettoes， their loud， eager yells making thewhole swamp clamorous with the sound. hope revived alittle as i reached the water. if it were only deeper， theymight loose the scent， and thus disconcerted， afford me    the opportunity of evading them. luckily， it grew deeperthe farther i proceeded—now over my ankles—now halfwayto my knees—now sinking a moment to my waist，and then emerging presently into more shallow places.
　　the dogs had not gained upon me since i struck thewater. evidently they were confused. now their savageintonations grew more and more distant， assuring methat i was leaving them. finally i stopped to listen， butthe long howl came booming on the air again， telling mei was not yet safe. from bog to bog， where i had stepped，they could still keep upon the track， though impeded bythe water. at length， to my great joy， i came to a widebayou， and plunging in， had soon stemmed its sluggishcurrent to the other side. there， certainly， the dogs wouldbe confounded—the current carrying down the streamall traces of that slight， mysterious scent， which enablesthe quick-smelling hound to follow in the track of thefugitive.
　　after crossing this bayou the water became so deepi could not run. i was now in what i afterwards learnedwas the “great pacoudrie swamp.” it was filled withimmense trees—the sycamore， the gum， the cotton woodand cypress， and extends， i am informed， to the shore ofthe calcasieu river. for thirty or forty miles it is withoutinhabitants， save wild beasts—the bear， the wild-cat， thetiger， and great slimy reptiles， that are crawling throughit everywhere. long before i reached the bayou， in fact，from the time i struck the water until i emerged from the  swamp on my return， these reptiles surrounded me. i sawhundreds of moccasin snakes. every log and bog—everytrunk of a fallen tree， over which i was compelled to stepor climb， was alive with them. they crawled away at myapproach， but sometimes in my haste， i almost placed myhand or foot upon them. they are poisonous serpents—their bite more fatal than the rattlesnake’s. besides， i hadlost one shoe， the sole having come entirely off， leavingthe upper only dangling to my ankle.
   http://www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ



第34章 Chapter X.(3)


　　i saw also many alligators， great and small， lying inthe water， or on pieces of floodwood. the noise i madeusually startled them， when they moved off and plungedinto the deepest places. sometimes， however， i wouldcome directly upon a monster before observing it. in suchcases， i would start back， run a short way round， and inthat manner shun them. straight forward， they will runa short distance rapidly， but do not possess the powerof turning. in a crooked race， there is no difficulty inevading them.
　　about two o’clock in the afternoon， i heard the last ofthe hounds. probably they did not cross the bayou. wetand weary， but relieved from the sense of instant peril， icontinued on， more cautious and afraid， however， of thesnakes and alligators than i had been in the earlier portionof my flight. now， before stepping into a muddy pool， iwould strike the water with a stick. if the waters moved， iwould go around it， if not， would venture through.
　　at length the sun went down， and gradually night’strailing mantle shrouded the great swamp in darkness.
　　still i staggered on， fearing every instant i should feelthe dreadful sting of the moccasin， or be crushed withinthe jaws of some disturbed alligator. the dread of themnow almost equaled the fear of the pursuing hounds. themoon arose after a time， its mild light creeping throughthe overspreading branches， loaded with long， pendentmoss. i kept traveling forwards until after midnight，hoping all the while that i would soon emerge intosome less desolate and dangerous region. but the watergrew deeper and the walking more difficult than ever. iperceived it would be impossible to proceed much farther，and knew not， moreover， what hands i might fall into，should i succeed in reaching a human habitation. notprovided with a pass， any white man would be at libertyto arrest me， and place me in prison until such time asmy master should “prove property， pay charges， and takeme away.” i was an estray， and if so unfortunate as tomeet a law-abiding citizen of louisiana， he would deemit his duty to his neighbor， perhaps， to put me forthwithin the pound. really， it was difficult to determine which ihad most reason to fear—dogs， alligators or men！
　　after midnight， however， i came to a halt. imaginationcannot picture the dreariness of the scene. the swampwas resonant with the quacking of innumerable ducks！
　　since the foundation of the earth， in all probability， ahuman footstep had never before so far penetrated therecesses of the swamp. it was not silent now—silent to a degree that rendered it oppressive，—as it was when thesun was shining in the heavens. my midnight intrusionhad awakened the feathered tribes， which seemed tothrong the morass in hundreds of thousands， and theirgarrulous throats poured forth such multitudinoussounds—there was such a fluttering of wings—such sullenplunges in the water all around me—that i was affrightedand appalled. all the fowls of the air， and all the creepingthings of the earth appeared to have assembled togetherin that particular place， for the purpose of filling it withclamor and confusion. not by human dwellings—not incrowded cities alone， are the sights and sounds of life.
　　the wildest places of the earth are full of them. evenin the heart of that dismal swamp， god had provided arefuge and a dwelling place for millions of living things.
　　the moon had now risen above the trees， when iresolved upon a new project. thus far i had endeavoredto travel as nearly south as possible. turning about iproceeded in a north-west direction， my object being tostrike the pine woods in the vicinity of master ford’s.
　　once within the shadow of his protection， i felt i wouldbe comparatively safe.
wwＷ、xiabook.com  



第35章 Chapter X.(4)


　　my clothes were in tatters， my hands， face， and bodycovered with scratches， received from the sharp knotsof fallen trees， and in climbing over piles of brushand floodwood. my bare foot was full of thorns. i wasbesmeared with muck and mud， and the green slimethat had collected on the surface of the dead water， in which i had been immersed to the neck many timesduring the day and night. hour after hour， and tiresomeindeed had they become， i continued to plod along onmy north-west course. the water began to grow lessdeep， and the ground more firm under my feet. at last ireached the pacoudrie， the same wide bayou i had swamwhile “outward bound.” i swam it again， and shortlyafter thought i heard a cock crow， but the sound wasfaint， and it might have been a mockery of the ear. thewater receded from my advancing footsteps—now i hadleft the bogs behind me—now—now i was on dry landthat gradually ascended to the plain， and i knew i wassomewhere in the “great pine woods.”
　　just at day-break i came to an opening—a sort ofsmall plantation—but one i had never seen before. inthe edge of the woods i came upon two men， a slave andhis young master， engaged in catching wild hogs. thewhite man i knew would demand my pass， and not ableto give him one， would take me into possession. i was toowearied to run again， and too desperate to be taken， andtherefore adopted a ruse that proved entirely successful.
　　assuming a fierce expression， i walked directly towardshim， looking him steadily in the face. as i approached，he moved backwards with an air of alarm. it was plain hewas much affrighted—that he looked upon me as someinfernal goblin， just arisen from the bowels of the swamp！
　　“where does william ford live？” i demanded， in nogentle tone.
　　“he lives seven miles from here，” was the reply.
　　“which is the way to his place？” i again demanded，trying to look more fiercely than ever.
　　“do you see those pine trees yonder？” he asked，pointing to two， a mile distant， that rose far above theirfellows， like a couple of tall sentinels， overlooking thebroad expanse of forest.
　　“i see them，” was the answer.
　　“at the feet of those pine trees，” he continued， “runsthe texas road. turn to the left， and it will lead you towilliam ford’s.”
　　without further parley， i hastened forward， happy ashe was， no doubt， to place the widest possible distancebetween us. striking the texas road， i turned to the lefthand， as directed， and soon passed a great fire， where apile of logs were burning. i went to it， thinking i woulddry my clothes； but the gray light of the morning was fastbreaking away，—some passing white man might observeme； besides， the heat overpowered me with the desire ofsleep： so， lingering no longer， i continued my travels， andfinally， about eight o’clock， reached the house of masterford.
　　the slaves were all absent from the quarters， at theirwork. stepping on to the piazza， i knocked at the door，which was soon opened by mistress ford. my appearancewas so changed—i was in such a wobegone and forlorncondition， she did not know me. inquiring if master fordwas at home， that good man made his appearance， before the question could be answered. i told him of my flight，and all the particulars connected with it. he listenedattentively， and when i had concluded， spoke to mekindly and sympathetically， and taking me to the kitchen，called john， and ordered him to prepare me food. i hadtasted nothing since daylight the previous morning.
　　when john had set the meal before me， the madamcame out with a bowl of milk， and many little deliciousdainties， such as rarely please the palate of a slave. iwas hungry， and i was weary， but neither food nor restafforded half the pleasure as did the blessed voicesspeaking kindness and consolation. it was the oil andthe wine which the good samaritan in the “great pinewoods” was ready to pour into the wounded spirit of theslave， who came to him， stripped of his raiment and halfdead.
　　they left me in the cabin， that i might rest. blessedbe sleep！ it visiteth all alike， descending as the dewsof heaven on the bond and free. soon it nestled to mybosom， driving away the troubles that oppressed it， andbearing me to that shadowy region， where i saw againthe faces， and listened to the voices of my children， who，alas， for aught i knew in my waking hours， had fallen intothe arms of that other sleep， from which they never wouldarouse.
www.xiaosgyitxt.com



第36章 Chapter XI.(1)


　　after a long sleep， sometime in the afternoon i awoke，refreshed， but very sore and stiff. sally came in andtalked with me， while john cooked me some dinner. sallywas in great trouble， as well as myself， one of her childrenbeing ill， and she feared it could not survive. dinnerover， after walking about the quarters for a while， visitingsally’s cabin and looking at the sick child， i strolled intothe madam’s garden. though it was a season of the yearwhen the voices of the birds are silent， and the trees arestripped of their summer glories in more frigid climes， yetthe whole variety of roses were then blooming there， andthe long， luxuriant vines creeping over the frames. thecrimson and golden fruit hung half hidden amidst theyounger and older blossoms of the peach， the orange， theplum， and the pomegranate； for， in that region of almostperpetual warmth， the leaves are falling and the budsbursting into bloom the whole year long.
　　i indulged the most grateful feelings towards masterand mistress ford， and wishing in some manner torepay their kindness， commenced trimming the vines，and afterwards weeding out the grass from among theorange and pomegranate trees. the latter grows eightor ten feet high， and its fruit， though larger， is similar in appearance to the jelly-flower. it has the luscious flavor ofthe strawberry. oranges， peaches， plums， and most otherfruits are indigenous to the rich， warm soil of avoyelles；but the apple， the most common of them all in colderlatitudes， is rarely to be seen.
　　mistress ford came out presently， saying it was praiseworthyin me， but i was not in a condition to labor， andmight rest myself at the quarters until master should godown to bayou boeuf， which would not be that day， and itmight not be the next. i said to her—to be sure， i felt bad，and was stiff， and that my foot pained me， the stubs andthorns having so torn it ， but thought such exercise wouldnot hurt me， and that it was a great pleasure to work forso good a mistress. thereupon she returned to the greathouse， and for three days i was diligent in the garden，cleaning the walks， weeding the flower beds， and pullingup the rank grass beneath the jessamine vines， which thegentle and generous hand of my protectress had taught toclamber along the walls.
　　the fourth morning， having become recruited andrefreshed， master ford ordered me to make ready toaccompany him to the bayou. there was but one saddlehorse at the opening， all the others with the mules havingbeen sent down to the plantation. i said i could walk，and bidding sally and john good-bye， left the opening，trotting along by the horse’s side.
　　that little paradise in the great pine woods wasthe oasis in the desert， towards which my heart turned130
　　lovingly， during many years of bondage. i went forthfrom it now with regret and sorrow， not so overwhelming，however， as if it had then been given me to know that ishould never return to it again.
　　master ford urged me to take his place occasionally onthe horse， to rest me； but i said no， i was not tired， and itwas better for me to walk than him. he said many kindand cheering things to me on the way， riding slowly， inorder that i might keep pace with him. the goodness ofgod was manifest， he declared， in my miraculous escapefrom the swamp. as daniel came forth unharmed fromthe den of lions， and as jonah had been preserved in thewhale’s belly， even so had i been delivered from evil bythe almighty. he interrogated me in regard to the variousfears and emotions i had experienced during the day andnight， and if i had felt， at any time， a desire to pray. i feltforsaken of the whole world， i answered him， and waspraying mentally all the while. at such times， said he， theheart of man turns instinctively towards his maker. inprosperity， and when there is nothing to injure or makehim afraid， he remembers him not， and is ready to defyhim； but place him in the midst of dangers， cut him offfrom human aid， let the grave open before him—thenit is， in the time of his tribulation， that the scoffer andunbelieving man turns to god for help， feeling there is noother hope， or refuge， or safety， save in his protecting arm.
　　so did that benignant man speak to me of this life andof the life hereafter； of the goodness and power of god，
　　and of the vanity of earthly things， as we journeyed alongthe solitary road towards bayou boeuf.
　　when within some five miles of the plantation， wediscovered a horseman at a distance， galloping towardsus. as he came near i saw that it was tibeats！ he lookedat me a moment， but did not address me， and turningabout， rode along side by side with ford. i trotted silentlyat their horses’ heels， listing to their conversation. fordinformed him of my arrival in the pine woods three daysbefore， of the sad plight i was in， and of the difficultiesand dangers i had encountered.
　　“well，” exclaimed tibeats， omitting his usual oaths inthe presence of ford， “i never saw such running before. i’llbet him against a hundred dollars， he’ll beat any niggerin louisiana. i offered john david cheney twenty-fivedollars to catch him， dead or alive， but he outran his dogsin a fair race. them cheney dogs ain’t much， after all.
　　dunwoodie’s hounds would have had him down beforehe touched the palmettoes. somehow the dogs got off thetrack， and we had to give up the hunt. we rode the horsesas far as we could， and then kept on foot till the waterwas three feet deep. the boys said he was drowned， sure.
　　i allow i wanted a shot at him mightily. ever since， i havebeen riding up and down the bayou， but had’nt muchhope of catching him—thought he was dead， sartin. oh，he’s a cuss to run—that nigger is！”
　　in this way tibeats ran on， describing his search inthe swamp， the wonderful speed with which i had fled   before the hounds， and when he had finished， masterford responded by saying， i had always been a willingand faithful boy with him； that he was sorry we had suchtrouble； that， according to platt’s story， he had beeninhumanly treated， and that he， tibeats， was himself infault. using hatchets and broad-axes upon slaves wasshameful， and should not be allowed， he remarked.
 /



第37章 Chapter XI.(2)


　　“this is no way of dealing with them， when first broughtinto the country. it will have a pernicious influence， andset them all running away. the swamps will be full ofthem. a little kindness would be far more effectual inrestraining them， and rendering them obedient， than theuse of such deadly weapons. every planter on the bayoushould frown upon such inhumanity. it is for the interestof all to do so. it is evident enough， mr. tibeats， thatyou and platt cannot live together. you dislike him， andwould not hesitate to kill him， and knowing it， he will runfrom you again through fear of his life. now， tibeats， youmust sell him， or hire him out， at least. unless you do so，i shall take measures to get him out of your possession.”
　　in this spirit ford addressed him the remainder ofthe distance. i opened not my mouth. on reaching theplantation they entered the great house， while i repairedto eliza’s cabin. the slaves were astonished to find methere， on returning from the field， supposing i wasdrowned. that night， again， they gathered about thecabin to listen to the story of my adventure. they tookit for granted i would be whipped， and that it would besevere， the well-known penalty of running away beingfive hundred lashes.
　　“poor fellow，” said eliza， taking me by the hand， “itwould have been better for you if you had drowned. youhave a cruel master， and he will kill you yet， i am afraid.”
　　lawson suggested that it might be， overseer chapinwould be appointed to inflict the punishment， in whichcase it would not be severe， whereupon mary， rachel，bristol， and others hoped it would be master ford， andthen it would be no whipping at all. they all pitied meand tried to console me， and were sad in view of thecastigation that awaited me， except kentucky john. therewere no bounds to his laughter； he filled the cabin withcachinnations， holding his sides to prevent an explosion，and the cause of his noisy mirth was the idea of myoutstripping the hounds. somehow， he looked at thesubject in a comical light. “i know’d dey would’nt cotchhim， when he run cross de plantation. o， de lor’， did’ntplatt pick his feet right up， tho’， hey？ when dem dogs gotwhar he was， he was’nt dar—haw， haw， haw！ o， de lor’ a’ mity！” —and then kentucky john relapsed into anotherof his boisterous fits.
　　early the next morning， tibeats left the plantation.
　　in the course of the forenoon， while sauntering aboutthe gin-house， a tall， good-looking man came to me， andinquired if i was tibeats’ boy， that youthful appellationbeing applied indiscriminately to slaves even though theymay have passed the number of three score years and ten.
　　i took off my hat， and answered that i was.
　　“how would you like to work for me？” he inquired.
　　“oh， i would like to， very much，” said i， inspired with asudden hope of getting away from tibeats.
　　“you worked under myers at peter tanner’s， didn’tyou？”
　　i replied i had， adding some complimentary remarksthat myers had made concerning me.
　　“well， boy，” said he， “i have hired you of your masterto work for me in the ‘big cane brake，’ thirty-eight milesfrom here， down on red river.”
　　this man was mr. eldret， who lived below ford’s， onthe same side of the bayou. i accompanied him to hisplantation， and in the morning started with his slave sam，and a wagon-load of provisions， drawn by four mules， forthe big cane， eldret and myers having preceded us onhorseback. this sam was a native of charleston， wherehe had a mother， brother and sisters. he “allowed” —acommon word among both black and white—that tibeatswas a mean man， and hoped， as i most earnestly did also，that his master would buy me.
　　we proceeded down the south shore of the bayou，crossing it at carey’s plantation； from thence to huffpower， passing which， we came upon the bayou rougeroad， which runs towards red river. after passingthrough bayou rouge swamp， and just at sunset， turningfrom the highway， we struck off into the “big canebrake.” we followed an unbeaten track， scarcely wideenough to admit the wagon. the cane， such as are usedfor fishing-rods， were as thick as they could stand. aperson could not be seen through them the distance of arod. the paths of wild beasts run through them in variousdirections —the bear and the american tiger aboundingin these brakes， and wherever there is a basin of stagnantwater， it is full of alligators.
　　we kept on our lonely course through the “big cane”
　　several miles， when we entered a clearing， known as“sutton’s field.” many years before， a man by the nameof sutton had penetrated the wilderness of cane to thissolitary place. tradition has it， that he fled thither， afugitive， not from service， but from justice. here he livedalone—recluse and hermit of the swamp—with his ownhands planting the seed and gathering in the harvest. oneday a band of indians stole upon his solitude， and aftera bloody battle， overpowered and massacred him. formiles the country round， in the slaves’ quarters， and onthe piazzas of “great houses，” where white children listento superstitious tales， the story goes， that that spot， in theheart of the “big cane，” is a haunted place. for more thana quarter of a century， human voices had rarely， if ever，disturbed the silence of the clearing. rank and noxiousweeds had overspread the once cultivated field—serpentssunned themselves on the doorway of the crumblingcabin. it was indeed a dreary picture of desolation.
　　passing “sutton’s field，” we followed a new-cut roadtwo miles farther， which brought us to its termination.




第38章 Chapter XI.(3)


　　we had now reached the wild lands of mr. eldret， where he contemplated clearing up an extensive plantation. wewent to work next morning with our cane-knives， andcleared a sufficient space to allow the erection of twocabins—one for myers and eldret， the other for sam，myself， and the slaves that were to join us. we were nowin the midst of trees of enormous growth， whose widespreadingbranches almost shut out the light of the sun，while the space between the trunks was an imperviousmass of cane， with here and there an occasional palmetto.
　　the bay and the sycamore， the oak and the cypress，reach a growth unparalleled， in those fertile lowlandsbordering the red river. from every tree， moreover，hang long， large masses of moss， presenting to theeye unaccustomed to them， a striking and singularappearance. this moss， in large quantities， is sent north，and there used for manufacturing purposes.
　　we cut down oaks， split them into rails， and with theseerected temporary cabins. we covered the roofs with thebroad palmetto leaf， an excellent substitute for shingles，as long as they last.
　　the greatest annoyance i met with here were smallflies， gnats and mosquitoes. they swarmed the air. theypenetrated the porches of the ear， the nose， the eyes， themouth. they sucked themselves beneath the skin. it wasimpossible to brush or beat them off. it seemed， indeed，as if they would devour us—carry us away piecemeal， intheir small tormenting mouths.
　　a lonelier spot， or one more disagreeable， than the centre of the “big cane brake，” it would be difficult toconceive； yet to me it was a paradise， in comparisonwith any other place in the company of master tibeats. ilabored hard， and oft-times was weary and fatigued， yet icould lie down at night in peace， and arise in the morningwithout fear.
　　in the course of a fortnight， four black girls came downfrom eldret’s plantation—charlotte， fanny， cresia andnelly. they were all large and stout. axes were put intotheir hands， and they were sent out with sam and myselfto cut trees. they were excellent choppers， the largestoak or sycamore standing but a brief season before theirheavy and well-directed blows. at piling logs， they wereequal to any man. there are lumberwomen as well aslumbermen in the forests of the south. in fact， in theregion of the bayou boeuf they perform their share ofall the labor required on the plantation. they plough，drag， drive team， clear wild lands， work on the highway，and so forth. some planters， owning large cotton andsugar plantations， have none other than the labor ofslave women. such an one is jim burns， who lives on thenorth shore of the bayou， opposite the plantation of johnfogaman.
　　on our arrival in the brake， eldret promised me， if iworked well， i might go up to visit my friends at ford’sin four weeks. on saturday night of the fifth week， ireminded him of his promise， when he told me i haddone so well， that i might go. i had set my heart upon it， and eldret’s announcement thrilled me with pleasure. iwas to return in time to commence the labors of the dayon tuesday morning.
　　while indulging the pleasant anticipation of so soonmeeting my old friends again， suddenly the hateful formof tibeats appeared among us. he inquired how myersand platt got along together， and was told， very well，and that platt was going up to ford’s plantation in themorning on a visit.
　　“poh， poh！” sneered tibeats； “it isn’t worth while —thenigger will get unsteady. he can’t go.”
　　but eldret insisted i had worked faithfully—that he hadgiven me his promise， and that， under the circumstances，i ought not to be disappointed. they then， it being aboutdark， entered one cabin and i the other. i could notgive up the idea of going； it was a sore disappointment.
　　before morning i resolved， if eldret made no objection，to leave at all hazards. at daylight i was at his door， withmy blanket rolled up into a bundle， and hanging on astick over my shoulder， waiting for a pass. tibeats cameout presently in one of his disagreeable moods， washedhis face， and going to a stump near by， sat down upon it，apparently busily thinking with himself after standingthere a long time， impelled by a sudden impulse ofimpatience， i started off.
　　“are you going without a pass？” he cried out to me.
　　“yes， master， i thought i would，” i answered.
　　“how do you think you’ll get there？” demanded he.
　　“don’t know，” was all the reply i made him.
　　“you’d be taken and sent to jail， where you ought tobe， before you got half-way there，” he added， passing intothe cabin as he said it. he came out soon with the passin his hand， and calling me a “d—d nigger that deserveda hundred lashes，” threw it on the ground. i picked it up，and hurried away right speedily.




第39章 Chapter XI.(4)


　　a slave caught off his master’s plantation withouta pass， may be seized and whipped by any white manwhom he meets. the one i now received was dated， andread as follows：“platt has permission to go to ford’s plantation， onbayou boeuf， and return by tuesday morning.
　　john m. tibeats.”
　　this is the usual form. on the way， a great manydemanded it， read it， and passed on. those having theair and appearance of gentlemen， whose dress indicatedthe possession of wealth， frequently took no notice ofme whatever； but a shabby fellow， an unmistakableloafer， never failed to hail me， and to scrutinize andexamine me in the most thorough manner. catchingrunaways is sometimes a money-making business. if，after advertising， no owner appears， they may be soldto the highest bidder； and certain fees are allowed thefinder for his services， at all events， even if reclaimed. “amean white，” therefore， —a name applied to the speciesloafer—considers it a god-send to meet an unknownnegro without a pass.
　　there are no inns along the highways in that portionof the state where i sojourned. i was wholly destitute ofmoney， neither did i carry any provisions， on my journeyfrom the big cane to bayou boeuf； nevertheless， with hispass in his hand， a slave need never suffer from hunger orfrom thirst. it is only necessary to present it to the masteror overseer of a plantation， and state his wants， when hewill be sent round to the kitchen and provided with foodor shelter， as the case may require. the traveler stops atany house and calls for a meal with as much freedom asif it was a public tavern. it is the general custom of thecountry. whatever their faults may be， it is certain theinhabitants along red river， and around the bayous inthe interior of louisiana are not wanting in hospitality.
　　i arrived at ford’s plantation towards the close ofthe afternoon， passing the evening in eliza’s cabin， withlawson， rachel， and others of my acquaintance. whenwe left washington eliza’s form was round and plump.
　　she stood erect， and in her silks and jewels， presenteda picture of graceful strength and elegance. now shewas but a thin shadow of her former self. her face hadbecome ghastly haggard， and the once straight andactive form was bowed down， as if bearing the weight ofa hundred years. crouching on her cabin floor， and cladin the coarse garments of a slave， old elisha berry wouldnot have recognized the mother of his child. i never sawher afterwards. having become useless in the cottonfield，she was bartered for a trifle， to some man residing in the vicinity of peter compton’s. grief had gnawedremorselessly at her heart， until her strength was gone；and for that， her last master， it is said， lashed and abusedher most unmercifully. but he could not whip backthe departed vigor of her youth， nor straighten up thatbended body to its full height， such as it was when herchildren were around her， and the light of freedom wasshining on her path.
　　i learned the particulars relative to her departurefrom this world， from some of compton’s slaves， whohad come over red river to the bayou， to assist youngmadam tanner during the “busy season.” she became atlength， they said， utterly helpless， for several weeks lyingon the ground floor in a dilapidated cabin， dependentupon the mercy of her fellowthralls for an occasionaldrop of water， and a morsel of food. her master did not“knock her on the head，” as is sometimes done to put asuffering animal out of misery， but left her unprovidedfor， and unprotected， to linger through a life of painand wretchedness to its natural close. when the handsreturned from the field one night they found her dead！
　　during the day， the angel of the lord， who movethinvisibly over all the earth， gathering in his harvest ofdeparting souls， had silently entered the cabin of thedying woman， and taken her from thence. she was free atlast！
　　next day， rolling up my blanket， i started on my returnto the big cane. after traveling five miles， at a placecalled huff power， the ever-present tibeats met me inthe road. he inquired why i was going back so soon， andwhen informed i was anxious to return by the time iwas directed， he said i need go no farther than the nextplantation， as he had that day sold me to edwin epps.
　　we walked down into the yard， where we met the lattergentleman， who examined me， and asked me the usualquestions propounded by purchasers. having been dulydelivered over， i was ordered to the quarters， and at thesame time directed to make a hoe and axe handle formyself.
　　i was now no longer the property of tibeats—his dog，his brute， dreading his wrath and cruelty day and night；and whoever or whatever my new master might proveto be， i could not， certainly， regret the change. so it wasgood news when the sale was announced， and with a sighof relief i sat down for the first time in my new abode.
　　tibeats soon after disappeared from that section ofthe country. once afterwards， and only once， i caughta glimpse of him. it was many miles from bayou boeuf.
下…书 网



第40章 Chapter XII.(1)


　　he was seated in the doorway of a low groggery. i waspassing， in a drove of slaves， through st. mary’s parish. edwin epps， of whom much will be said during theremainder of this history， is a large， portly， heavybodiedman with light hair， high cheek bones， and a romannose of extraordinary dimensions. he has blue eyes，a fair complexion， and is， as i should say， full six feethigh. he has the sharp， inquisitive expression of ajockey. his manners are repulsive and coarse， and hislanguage gives speedy and unequivocal evidence that hehas never enjoyed the advantages of an education. hehas the faculty of saying most provoking things， in thatrespect even excelling old peter tanner. at the time icame into his possession， edwin epps was fond of thebottle， his “sprees” sometimes extending over the spaceof two whole weeks. latterly， however， he had reformedhis habits， and when i left him， was as strict a specimenof temperance as could be found on bayou boeuf. when“in his cups，” master epps was a roystering， blustering，noisy fellow， whose chief delight was in dancing with his“niggers，” or lashing them about the yard with his longwhip， just for the pleasure of hearing them screech andscream， as the great welts were planted on their backs.
　　when sober， he was silent， reserved and cunning， notbeating us indiscriminately， as in his drunken moments，but sending the end of his rawhide to some tender spot ofa lagging slave， with a sly dexterity peculiar to himself.
　　he had been a driver and overseer in his youngeryears， but at this time was in possession of a plantationon bayou huff power， two and a half miles fromholmesville， eighteen from marksville， and twelve fromcheneyville. it belonged to joseph b. roberts， his wife’suncle， and was leased by epps. his principal businesswas raising cotton， and inasmuch as some may read thisbook who have never seen a cotton field， a deion ofthe manner of its culture may not be out of place.
　　the ground is prepared by throwing up beds or ridges，with the plough—back-furrowing， it is called. oxenand mules， the latter almost exclusively， are used inploughing. the women as frequently as the men performthis labor， feeding， currying， and taking care of theirteams， and in all respects doing the field and stable work，precisely as do the ploughboys of the north.
　　the beds， or ridges， are six feet wide， that is， fromwater furrow to water furrow. a plough drawn by onemule is then run along the top of the ridge or center ofthe bed， making the drill， into which a girl usually dropsthe seed， which she carries in a bag hung round herneck. behind her comes a mule and harrow， coveringup the seed， so that two mules three slaves， a ploughand harrow， are employed in planting a row of cotton.
　　this is done in the months of march and april. corn isplanted in february. when there are no cold rains， thecotton usually makes its appearance in a week. in thecourse of eight or ten days afterwards the first hoeing iscommenced. this is performed in part， also， by the aidof the plough and mule. the plough passes as near aspossible to the cotton on both sides， throwing the furrowfrom it. slaves follow with their hoes， cutting up the grassand cotton， leaving hills two feet and a half apart. this iscalled scraping cotton. in two weeks more commencesthe second hoeing. this time the furrow is throwntowards the cotton. only one stalk， the largest， is now leftstanding in each hill. in another fortnight it is hoed thethird time， throwing the furrow towards the cotton in thesame manner as before， and killing all the grass betweenthe rows. about the first of july， when it is a foot high orthereabouts， it is hoed the fourth and last time. now thewhole space between the rows is ploughed， leaving a deepwater furrow in the center. during all these hoeings theoverseer or driver follows the slaves on horseback with awhip， such as has been described. the fastest hoer takesthe lead row. he is usually about a rod in advance of hiscompanions. if one of them passes him， he is whipped.
　　if one falls behind or is a moment idle， he is whipped. infact， the lash is flying from morning until night， the wholeday long. the hoeing season thus continues from apriluntil july， a field having no sooner been finished once，than it is commenced again.
　　in the latter part of august begins the cotton pickingseason. at this time each slave is presented with a sack.
　　a strap is fastened to it， which goes over the neck， holdingthe mouth of the sack breast high， while the bottomreaches nearly to the ground. each one is also presentedwith a large basket that will hold about two barrels. this isto put the cotton in when the sack is filled. the baskets arecarried to the field and placed at the beginning of the rows.
　　when a new hand， one unaccustomed to the business，is sent for the first time into the field， he is whipped upsmartly， and made for that day to pick as fast as he canpossibly. at night it is weighed， so that his capabilityin cotton picking is known. he must bring in thesame weight each night following. if it falls short， it isconsidered evidence that he has been laggard， and agreater or less number of lashes is the penalty.
　　an ordinary day’s work is two hundred pounds. aslave who is accustomed to picking， is punished， if he orshe brings in a less quantity than that. there is a greatdifference among them as regards this kind of labor.
　　some of them seem to have a natural knack， or quickness，which enables them to pick with great celerity， and withboth hands， while others， with whatever practice orindustry， are utterly unable to come up to the ordinarystandard. such hands are taken from the cotton field andemployed in other business. patsey， of whom i shall havemore to say， was known as the most remarkable cottonpicker on bayou boeuf. she picked with both hands andwith such surprising rapidity， that five hundred pounds aday was not unusual for her.




第41章 Chapter XII.(2)


　　each one is tasked， therefore， according to his pickingabilities， none， however， to come short of two hundredweight. i， being unskillful always in that business，would have satisfied my master by bringing in the latterquantity， while on the other hand， patsey would surelyhave been beaten if she failed to produce twice as much.
　　the cotton grows from five to seven feet high， eachstalk having a great many branches， shooting out inall directions， and lapping each other above the waterfurrow.
　　there are few sights more pleasant to the eye， than awide cotton field when it is in the bloom. it presents anappearance of purity， like an immaculate expanse of light，new-fallen snow.
　　sometimes the slave picks down one side of a row，and back upon the other， but more usually， there is oneon either side， gathering all that has blossomed， leavingthe unopened bolls for a succeeding picking. when thesack is filled， it is emptied into the basket and troddendown. it is necessary to be extremely careful the firsttime going through the field， in order not to breakthe branches off the stalks. the cotton will not bloomupon a broken branch. epps never failed to inflict theseverest chastisement on the unlucky servant who， eithercarelessly or unavoidably， was guilty in the least degree inthis respect.
　　the hands are required to be in the cotton field assoon as it is light in the morning， and， with the exceptionof ten or fifteen minutes， which is given them at noonto swallow their allowance of cold bacon， they are notpermitted to be a moment idle until it is too dark to see，and when the moon is full， they often times labor tillthe middle of the night. they do not dare to stop even atdinner time， nor return to the quarters， however late itbe， until the order to halt is given by the driver.
　　the day’s work over in the field， the baskets are “toted，”
　　or in other words， carried to the gin-house， where thecotton is weighed. no matter how fatigued and wearyhe may be—no matter how much he longs for sleep andrest—a slave never approaches the gin-house with hisbasket of cotton but with fear. if it falls short in weight—ifhe has not performed the full task appointed him， heknows that he must suffer. and if he has exceeded it byten or twenty pounds， in all probability his master willmeasure the next day’s task accordingly. so， whether hehas too little or too much， his approach to the gin-houseis always with fear and trembling. most frequently theyhave too little， and therefore it is they are not anxious toleave the field. after weighing， follow the whippings； andthen the baskets are carried to the cotton house， and theircontents stored away like hay， all hands being sent in totramp it down. if the cotton is not dry， instead of takingit to the gin-house at once， it is laid upon platforms， twofeet high， and some three times as wide， covered withboards or plank， with narrow walks running betweenthem.
　　this done， the labor of the day is not yet ended， byany means. each one must then attend to his respectivechores. one feeds the mules， another the swine—anothercuts the wood， and so forth； besides， the packing is alldone by candle light. finally， at a late hour， they reach thequarters， sleepy and overcome with the long day’s toil.
　　then a fire must be kindled in the cabin， the corn groundin the small hand-mill， and supper， and dinner for thenext day in the field， prepared. all that is allowed themis corn and bacon， which is given out at the corncrib andsmoke-house every sunday morning. each one receives，as his weekly allowance， three and a half pounds ofbacon， and corn enough to make a peck of meal. that isall—no tea， coffee， sugar， and with the exception of a veryscanty sprinkling now and then， no salt. i can say， froma ten years’ residence with master epps， that no slave ofhis is ever likely to suffer from the gout， superinducedby excessive high living. master epps’ hogs were fed onshelled corn—it was thrown out to his “niggers” in the ear.
　　the former， he thought， would fatten faster by shelling，and soaking it in the water—the latter， perhaps， if treatedin the same manner， might grow too fat to labor. masterepps was a shrewd calculator， and knew how to managehis own animals， drunk or sober.
　　the corn mill stands in the yard beneath a shelter. itis like a common coffee mill， the hopper holding aboutsix quarts. there was one privilege which master eppsgranted freely to every slave he had. they might grindtheir corn nightly， in such small quantities as their dailywants required， or they might grind the whole week’sallowance at one time， on sundays， just as they preferred.
　　a very generous man was master epps！
　　i kept my corn in a small wooden box， the meal ina gourd； and， by the way， the gourd is one of the mostconvenient and necessary utensils on a plantation.
　　besides supplying the place of all kinds of crockery ina slave cabin， it is used for carrying water to the fields.
　　another， also， contains the dinner. it dispenses withthe necessity of pails， dippers， basins， and such tin andwooden superfluities altogether.
　　when the corn is ground， and fire is made， the baconis taken down from the nail on which it hangs， a slice cutoff and thrown upon the coals to broil. the majority ofslaves have no knife， much less a fork. they cut their baconwith the axe at the woodpile. the corn meal is mixed with alittle water， placed in the fire， and baked. when it is “donebrown，” the ashes are scraped off， and being placed upona chip， which answers for a table， the tenant of the slavehut is ready to sit down upon the ground to supper. by thistime it is usually midnight. the same fear of punishmentwith which they approach the gin-house， possesses themagain on lying down to get a snatch of rest. it is the fearof oversleeping in the morning. such an offence wouldcertainly be attended with not less than twenty lashes. witha prayer that he may be on his feet and wide awake at thefirst sound of the horn， he sinks to his slumbers nightly.




第42章 Chapter XII.(3)


　　the softest couches in the world are not to be found inthe log mansion of the slave. the one whereon i reclinedyear after year， was a plank twelve inches wide and tenfeet long. my pillow was a stick of wood. the beddingwas a coarse blanket， and not a rag or shred beside. mossmight be used， were it not that it directly breeds a swarmof fleas.
　　the cabin is constructed of logs， without floor orwindow. the latter is altogether unnecessary， the crevicesbetween the logs admitting sufficient light. in stormyweather the rain drives through them， rendering itcomfortless and extremely disagreeable. the rude doorhangs on great wooden hinges. in one end is constructedan awkward fire-place.
　　an hour before day light the horn is blown. then theslaves arouse， prepare their breakfast， fill a gourd withwater， in another deposit their dinner of cold bacon andcorn cake， and hurry to the field again. it is an offenceinvariably followed by a flogging， to be found at thequarters after daybreak. then the fears and labors ofanother day begin； and until its close there is no suchthing as rest. he fears he will be caught lagging throughthe day； he fears to approach the gin-house with hisbasket-load of cotton at night； he fears， when he liesdown， that he will oversleep himself in the morning. suchis a true， faithful， unexaggerated picture and descriptionof the slave’s daily life， during the time of cotton-picking，on the shores of bayou boeuf.
　　in the month of january， generally， the fourth and lastpicking is completed. then commences the harvesting， ofcorn. this is considered a secondary crop， and receivesfar less attention than the cotton. it is planted， as alreadymentioned， in february. corn is grown in that regionfor the purpose of fattening hogs and feeding slaves；very little， if any， being sent to market. it is the whitevariety， the ear of great size， and the stalk growing to theheight of eight， and often times ten feet. in august theleaves are stripped off， dried in the sun， bound in smallbundles， and stored away as provender for the mules andoxen. after this the slaves go through the field， turningdown the ear， for the purpose of keeping the rains frompenetrating to the grain. it is left in this condition untilafter cotton-picking is over， whether earlier or later. thenthe ears are separated from the stalks， and deposited inthe corncrib with the husks on； otherwise， stripped ofthe husks， the weevil would destroy it. the stalks are leftstanding in the field.
　　the carolina， or sweet potato， is also grown in thatregion to some extent. they are not fed， however， to hogsor cattle， and are considered but of small importance.
　　they are preserved by placing them upon the surface ofthe ground， with a slight covering of earth or cornstalks.
　　there is not a cellar on bayou boeuf. the ground is so lowit would fill with water. potatoes are worth from two tothree “bits，” or shillings a barrel； corn， except when thereis an unusual scarcity， can be purchased at the same rate.
   



第43章 Chapter XII.(4)


　　as soon as the cotton and corn crops are secured， thestalks are pulled up， thrown into piles and burned. theploughs are started at the same time， throwing up thebeds again， preparatory to another planting. the soil， inthe parishes of rapides and avoyelles， and throughoutthe whole country， so far as my observation extended， isof exceeding richness and fertility. it is a kind of marl，of a brown or reddish color. it does not require thoseinvigorating composts necessary to more barren lands，and on the same field the same crop is grown for manysuccessive years.
　　ploughing， planting， picking cotton， gathering thecorn， and pulling and burning stalks， occupies the wholeof the four seasons of the year. drawing and cuttingwood， pressing cotton， fattening and killing hogs， are butincidental labors.
　　in the month of september or october， the hogs arerun out of the swamps by dogs， and confined in pens.
　　on a cold morning， generally about new year’s day， theyare slaughtered. each carcass is cut into six parts， andpiled one above the other in salt， upon large tables in thesmoke-house. in this condition it remains a fortnight，when it is hung up， and a fire built， and continued morethan half the time during the remainder of the year. thisthorough smoking is necessary to prevent the bacon frombecoming infested with worms. in so warm a climate itis difficult to preserve it， and very many times myselfand my companions have received our weekly allowance  of three pounds and a half， when it was full of thesedisgusting vermin.
　　although the swamps are overrun with cattle， theyare never made the source of profit， to any considerableextent. the planter cuts his mark upon the ear， orbrands his initials upon the side， and turns them intothe swamps， to roam unrestricted within their almostlimitless confines. they are the spanish breed， small andspike-horned. i have known of droves being taken frombayou boeuf， but it is of very rare occurrence. the value ofthe best cows is about five dollars each. two quarts at onemilking， would be considered an unusual large quantity.
　　they furnish little tallow， and that of a soft， inferiorquality. notwithstanding the great number of cows thatthrong the swamps， the planters are indebted to thenorth for their cheese and butter， which is purchased inthe new-orleans market. salted beef is not an article offood either in the great house， or in the cabin.
　　master epps was accustomed to attend shootingmatches for the purpose of obtaining what fresh beefhe required. these sports occurred weekly at theneighboring village of holmesville. fat beeves are driventhither and shot at， a stipulated price being demandedfor the privilege. the lucky marksman divides the fleshamong his fellows， and in this manner the attendingplanters are supplied.
　　the great number of tame and untamed cattle whichswarm the woods and swamps of bayou boeuf， mostprobably suggested that appellation to the french，inasmuch as the term， translated， signifies the creek orriver of the wild ox.
　　garden products， such as cabbages， turnips and thelike， are cultivated for the use of the master and hisfamily. they have greens and vegetables at all times andseasons of the year. “the grass withereth and the flowerfadeth” before the desolating winds of autumn in the chillnorthern latitudes， but perpetual verdure overspreads thehot lowlands， and flowers bloom in the heart of winter， inthe region of bayou boeuf.
　　there are no meadows appropriated to the cultivationof the grasses. the leaves of the corn supply a sufficiencyof food for the laboring cattle， while the rest provide forthemselves all the year in the evergrowing pasture.
　　there are many other peculiarities of climate， habit，custom， and of the manner of living and laboring atthe south， but the foregoing， it is supposed， will givethe reader an insight and general idea of life on acotton plantation in louisiana. the mode of cultivatingcane， and the process of sugar manufacturing， will bementioned in another place.
   http://www.xiabook．com



第44章 Chapter XIII.(1)


　　on my arrival at master epps’， in obedience to hisorder， the first business upon which i entered was themaking of an axe-halve. the handles in use there aresimply a round， straight stick. i made a crooked one，shaped like those to which i had been accustomed at thenorth. when finished， and presented to epps， he lookedat it with astonishment， unable to determine exactly whatit was. he had never before seen such a handle， and wheni explained its conveniences， he was forcibly struck withthe novelty of the idea. he kept it in the house a longtime， and when his friends called， was wont to exhibit itas a curiosity.
　　it was now the season of hoeing. i was first sent intothe corn-field， and afterwards set to scraping cotton.
　　in this employment i remained until hoeing time wasnearly passed， when i began to experience the symptomsof approaching illness. i was attacked with chills， whichwere succeeded by a burning fever. i became weak andemaciated， and frequently so dizzy that it caused meto reel and stagger like a drunken man. nevertheless，i was compelled to keep up my row. when in health ifound little difficulty in keeping pace with my fellowlaborers，but now it seemed to be an utter impossibility.
　　often i fell behind， when the driver’s lash was sure togreet my back， infusing into my sick and drooping bodya little temporary energy. i continued to decline until atlength the whip became entirely ineffectual. the sharpeststing of the rawhide could not arouse me. finally， inseptember， when the busy season of cotton picking wasat hand， i was unable to leave my cabin. up to this timei had received no medicine， nor any attention from mymaster or mistress. the old cook visited me occasionally，preparing me corn-coffee， and sometimes boiling a bitof bacon， when i had grown too feeble to accomplish itmyself.
　　when it was said that i would die， master epps，unwilling to bear the loss， which the death of an animalworth a thousand dollars would bring upon him，concluded to incur the expense of sending to holmesvillefor dr. wines. he announced to epps that it was theeffect of the climate， and there was a probability of hislosing me. he directed me to eat no meat， and to partakeof no more food than was absolutely necessary to sustainlife. several weeks elapsed， during which time， underthe scanty diet to which i was subjected， i had partiallyrecovered. one morning， long before i was in a propercondition to labor， epps appeared at the cabin door， and，presenting me a sack， ordered me to the cotton field. atthis time i had had no experience whatever in cottonpicking. it was an awkward business indeed. while othersused both hands， snatching the cotton and depositing itin the mouth of the sack， with a precision and dexteritythat was incomprehensible to me， i had to seize the bollwith one hand， and deliberately draw out the white，gushing blossom with the other.
　　depositing the cotton in the sack， moreover， was adifficulty that demanded the exercise of both hands andeyes. i was compelled to pick it from the ground whereit would fall， nearly as often as from the stalk where ithad grown. i made havoc also with the branches， loadedwith the yet unbroken bolls， the long， cumbersome sackswinging from side to side in a manner not allowable inthe cotton field. after a most laborious day i arrived atthe gin-house with my load. when the scale determinedits weight to be only ninety-five pounds， not half thequantity required of the poorest picker， epps threatenedthe severest flogging， but in consideration of my being a“raw hand，” concluded to pardon me on that occasion.
　　the following day， and many days succeeding， i returnedat night with no better success—i was evidently notdesigned for that kind of labor. i had not the gift—thedexterous fingers and quick motion of patsey， who couldfly along one side of a row of cotton， stripping it of itsundefiled and fleecy whiteness miraculously fast. practiceand whipping were alike unavailing， and epps， satisfiedof it at last， swore i was a disgrace—that i was not fit toassociate with a cotton-picking “nigger”—that i could notpick enough in a day to pay the trouble of weighing it， andthat i should go into the cotton field no more. i was now employed in cutting and hauling wood， drawing cottonfrom the field to the gin-house， and performed whateverother service was required. suffice to say， i was neverpermitted to be idle.
　　it was rarely that a day passed by without one ormore whippings. this occurred at the time the cottonwas weighed. the delinquent， whose weight had fallenshort， was taken out， stripped， made to lie upon theground， face downwards， when he received a punishmentproportioned to his offence. it is the literal， unvarnishedtruth， that the crack of the lash， and the shrieking of theslaves， can be heard from dark till bed time， on epps’plantation， any day almost during the entire period of thecotton-picking season.
　　the number of lashes is graduated according to thenature of the case. twenty-five are deemed a mere brush，inflicted， for instance， when a dry leaf or piece of boll isfound in the cotton， or when a branch is broken in the field；fifty is the ordinary penalty following all delinquenciesof the next higher grade； one hundred is called severe：
　　it is the punishment inflicted for the serious offence ofstanding idle in the field； from one hundred and fifty totwo hundred is bestowed upon him who quarrels with hiscabin-mates， and five hundred， well laid on， besides themangling of the dogs， perhaps， is certain to consign thepoor， unpitied runaway to weeks of pain and agony.




第45章 Chapter XIII.(2)


　　during the two years epps remained on the plantationat bayou huff power， he was in the habit， as often as once in a fortnight at least， of coming home intoxicatedfrom holmesville. the shooting-matches almostinvariably concluded with a debauch. at such times hewas boisterous and half-crazy. often he would breakthe dishes， chairs， and whatever furniture he could layhis hands on. when satisfied with his amusement in thehouse， he would seize the whip and walk forth into theyard. then it behooved the slaves to be watchful andexceeding wary. the first one who came within reachfelt the smart of his lash. sometimes for hours he wouldkeep them running in all directions， dodging aroundthe corners of the cabins. occasionally he would comeupon one unawares， and if he succeeded in inflicting afair， round blow， it was a feat that much delighted him.
　　the younger children， and the aged， who had becomeinactive， suffered then. in the midst of， the confusion hewould slily take his stand behind a cabin， waiting withraised whip， to dash it into the first black face that peepedcautiously around the corner.
　　at other times he would come home in a less brutalhumor. then there must be a merry-making. then allmust move to the measure of a tune. then master eppsmust needs regale his melodious ears with the musicof a fiddle. then did he become buoyant， elastic， gaily“tripping the light fantastic toe” around the piazza and allthorough the house.
　　tibeats， at the time of my sale， had informed him icould play on the violin. he had received his information161
　　from ford. through the importunities of mistress epps，her husband had been induced to purchase me oneduring a visit to new-orleans. frequently i was calledinto the house to play before the family， mistress beingpassionately fond of music.
　　all of us would be assembled in the large room ofthe great house， whenever epps came home in one ofhis dancing moods. no matter how worn out and tiredwe were， there must be a general dance. when properlystationed on the floor， i would strike up a tune.
　　“dance， you d—d niggers， dance，” epps would shout.
　　then there must be no halting or delay， no slow orlanguid movements； all must be brisk， and lively， andalert. “up and down， heel and toe， and away we go，” wasthe order of the hour. epps’ portly form mingled withthose of his dusky slaves， moving rapidly through all themazes of the dance.
　　usually his whip was in his hand， ready to fall aboutthe ears of the presumptuous thrall， who dared to rest amoment， or even stop to catch his breath. when he washimself exhausted， there would be a brief cessation， but itwould be very brief. with a slash， and crack， and flourishof the whip， he would shout again， “dance， niggers，dance，” and away they would go once more， pell-mell，while i， spurred by an occasional sharp touch of the lash，sat in a corner， extracting from my violin a marvelousquick-stepping tune. the mistress often upbraidedhim， declaring she would return to her father’s house at cheneyville； nevertheless， there were times she could notrestrain a burst of laughter， on witnessing his uproariouspranks. frequently， we were thus detained until almostmorning. bent with excessive toil—actually suffering for alittle refreshing rest， and feeling rather as if we could castourselves upon the earth and weep， many a night in thehouse of edwin epps have his unhappy slaves been madeto dance and laugh.
　　notwithstanding these deprivations in order to gratifythe whim of an unreasonable master， we had to be in thefield as soon as it was light， and during the day performthe ordinary and accustomed task. such deprivationscould not be urged at the scales in extenuation of any lackof weight， or in the cornfield for not hoeing with the usualrapidity. the whippings were just as severe as if we hadgone forth in the morning， strengthened and invigoratedby a night’s repose. indeed， after such frantic revels， hewas always more sour and savage than before， punishingfor slighter causes， and using the whip with increased andmore vindictive energy.
　　ten years i toiled for that man without reward. tenyears of my incessant labor has contributed to increasethe bulk of his possessions. ten years i was compelled toaddress him with down-cast eyes and uncovered head—inthe attitude and language of a slave. i am indebted to himfor nothing， save undeserved abuse and stripes.
　　beyond the reach of his inhuman thong， and standingon the soil of the free state where i was born， thanks beto heaven， i can raise my head once more among men.
　　i can speak of the wrongs i have suffered， and of thosewho inflicted them， with upraised eyes. but i have nodesire to speak of him or any other one otherwise thantruthfully. yet to speak truthfully of edwin epps would beto say—he is a man in whose heart the quality of kindnessor of justice is not found. a rough， rude energy， unitedwith an uncultivated mind and an avaricious spirit， arehis prominent characteristics. he is known as a “niggerbreaker，” distinguished for his faculty of subduingthe spirit of the slave， and priding himself upon hisreputation in this respect， as a jockey boasts of his skill inmanaging a refractory horse. he looked upon a coloredman， not as a human being， responsible to his creatorfor the small talent entrusted to him， but as a “chattelpersonal，” as mere live property， no better， except invalue， than his mule or dog. when the evidence， clear andindisputable， was laid before him that i was a free man，and as much entitled to my liberty as he —when， on theday i left， he was informed that i had a wife and children，as dear to me as his own babes to him， he only raved andswore， denouncing the law that tore me from him， anddeclaring he would find out the man who had forwardedthe letter that disclosed the place of my captivity， if therewas any virtue or power in money， and would take hislife. he thought of nothing but his loss， and cursed me forhaving been born free. he could have stood unmoved andseen the tongues of his poor slaves torn out by the roots—   he could have seen them burned to ashes over a slow fire，or gnawed to death by dogs， if it only brought him profit.
www、mdwenxue.com



第46章 Chapter XIII.(3)


　　such a hard， cruel， unjust man is edwin epps.
　　there was but one greater savage on bayou boeufthan he. jim burns’ plantation was cultivated， as alreadymentioned， exclusively by women. that barbarian kepttheir backs so sore and raw， that they could not performthe customary labor demanded daily of the slave. heboasted of his cruelty， and through all the country roundwas accounted a more thorough-going， energetic manthan even epps. a brute himself， jim burns had not aparticle of mercy for his subject brutes， and like a fool，whipped and scourged away the very strength uponwhich depended his amount of gain.
　　epps remained on huff power two years， when， havingaccumulated a considerable sum of money， he expendedit in the purchase of the plantation on the east bank ofbayou boeuf， where he still continues to reside. he tookpossession of it in 1845， after the holidays were passed.
　　he carried thither with him nine slaves， all of whom，except myself， and susan， who has since died， remainthere yet. he made no addition to this force， and for eightyears the following were my companions in his quarters，viz： abram， wiley， phebe， bob， henry， edward， and patsey.
　　all these， except edward， born since， were purchased outof a drove by epps during the time he was overseer forarchy b. williams， whose plantation is situated on theshore of red river， not far from alexandria.
　　abram was tall， standing a full head above anycommon man. he is sixty years of age， and was born intennessee. twenty years ago， he was purchased by atrader， carried into south carolina， and sold to jamesbuford， of williamsburgh county， in that state. in hisyouth he was renowned for his great strength， but age andunremitting toil have somewhat shattered his powerfulframe and enfeebled his mental faculties.
　　wiley is forty-eight. he was born on the estate， ofwilliam tassle， and for many years took charge of thatgentleman’s ferry over the big black river， in southcarolina.
　　phebe was a slave of buford， tassle’s neighbor， andhaving married wiley， he bought the latter， at her instigation.
　　buford was a kind master， sheriff of the county， and inthose days a man of wealth.
　　bob and henry are phebe’s children， by a formerhusband， their father having been abandoned to giveplace to wiley. that seductive youth had insinuatedhimself into phebe’s affections， and therefore the faithlessspouse had gently kicked her first husband out of hercabin door. edward had been born to them on bayouhuff power.
　　patsey is twenty-three—also from buford’s plantation.
　　she is in no wise connected with the others， but gloriesin the fact that she is the offspring of a “guinea nigger，”
　　brought over to cuba in a slave ship， and in the course oftrade transferred to buford， who was her mother’s owner.
　　this， as i learned from them， is a genealogical accountof my master’s shaves. for years they had been together.
　　often they recalled the memories of other days， andsighed to retrace their steps to the old home in carolina.
　　troubles came upon their master buford， which broughtfar greater troubles upon them. he became involved indebt， and unable to bear up against his failing fortunes，was compelled to sell these， and others of his slaves.
　　in a chain gang they had been driven from beyond themississippi to the plantation of archy b. williams. edwinepps， who， for a long while had been his driver andoverseer， was about establishing himself in business onhis own account， at the time of their arrival， and acceptedthem in payment of his wages.




第47章 Chapter XIII.(4)


　　old abram was a kind-hearted being—a sort of patriarchamong us， fond of entertaining his younger brethrenwith grave and serious discourse. he was deeply versedin such philosophy as is taught in the cabin of the slave；but the great absorbing hobby of uncle abram wasgeneral jackson， whom his young master in tennesseehad followed to the wars. he loved to wander back， inimagination， to the place where he was born， and torecount the scenes of his youth during those stirringtimes when the nation was in arms. he had been athletic，and more keen and powerful than the generality of hisrace， but now his eye had become dim， and his naturalforce abated. very often， indeed， while discussing the bestmethod of baking the hoe-cake， or expatiating at large upon the glory of jackson， he would forget where he lefthis hat， or his hoe， or his basket； and then would the oldman be laughed at， if epps was absent， and whipped if hewas present. so was he perplexed continually， and sighedto think that he was growing aged and going to decay.
　　philosophy and jackson and forgetfulness had playedthe mischief with him， and it was evident that all of themcombined were fast bringing down the gray hairs of uncleabram to the grave.
　　aunt phebe had been an excellent field hand， butlatterly was put into the kitchen， where she remained，except occasionally， in a time of uncommon hurry. shewas a sly old creature， and when not in the presence ofher mistress or her master， was garrulous in the extreme.
　　wiley， on the contrary， was silent. he performed histask without murmur or complaint， seldom indulging inthe luxury of speech， except to utter a wish that he wasaway from epps， and back once more in south carolina.
　　bob and henry had reached the ages of twenty
　　and twenty-three， and were distinguished for nothingextraordinary or unusual， while edward， a lad of thirteen，not yet able to maintain his row in the corn or the cottonfield， was kept in the great house， to wait on the littleeppses.
　　patsey was slim and straight. she stood erect as thehuman form is capable of standing. there was an airof loftiness in her movement， that neither labor， norweariness， nor punishment could destroy. truly， patsey
　　was a splendid animal， and were it not that bondagehad enshrouded her intellect in utter and everlastingdarkness， would have been chief among ten thousand ofher people. she could leap the highest fences， and a fleethound it was indeed， that could outstrip her in a race.
　　no horse could fling her from his back. she was a skillfulteamster. she turned as true a furrow as the best， and atsplitting rails there were none who could excel her. whenthe order to halt was heard at night， she would have hermules at the crib， unharnessed， fed and curried beforeuncle abram had found his hat. not， however， for allor any of these， was she chiefly famous. such lightninglikemotion was in her fingers as no other fingers everpossessed， and therefore it was， that in cotton pickingtime， patsey was queen of the field.
　　she had a genial and pleasant temper， and was faithfuland obedient. naturally， she was a joyous creature， alaughing ， light-hearted girl， rejoicing in the mere senseof existence. yet patsey wept oftener， and suffered more，than any of her companions. she had been literallyexcoriated. her back bore the scars of a thousandstripes； not because she was backward in her work， norbecause she was of an unmindful and rebellious spirit，but because it had fallen to her lot to be the slave of alicentious master and a jealous mistress. she shrankbefore the lustful eye of the one， and was in danger evenof her life at the hands of the other， and between the two，she was indeed accursed. in the great house， for days169
　　together， there were high and angry words， poutingsand estrangement， whereof she was the innocent cause.
　　nothing delighted the mistress so much as to see hersuffer， and more than once， when epps had refused to sellher， has she tempted me with bribes to put her secretlyto death， and bury her body in some lonely place in themargin of the swamp. gladly would patsey have appeasedthis unforgiving spirit， if it had been in her power， but notlike joseph， dared she escape from master epps， leavingher garment in his hand. patsey walked under a cloud. ifshe uttered a word in opposition to her master’s will， thelash was resorted to at once， to bring her to subjection；if she was not watchful when about her cabin， or whenwalking in the yard， a billet of wood， or a broken bottleperhaps， hurled from her mistress’ hand， would smite herunexpectedly in the face. the enslaved victim of lust andhate， patsey had no comfort of her life.
　　these were my companions and fellow-slaves， withwhom i was accustomed to be driven to the field， andwith whom it has been my lot to dwell for ten years in thelog cabins of edwin epps. they， if living， are yet toilingon the banks of bayou boeuf， never destined to breathe，as i now do， the blessed air of liberty， nor to shake offthe heavy shackles that enthrall them， until they shall liedown forever in the dust.




第48章 Chapter XIV.(1)


　　the first year of epps’ residence on the bayou， 1845，the caterpillars almost totally destroyed the cotton cropthroughout that region. there was little to be done，so that the slaves were necessarily idle half the time.
　　however， there came a rumor to bayou boeuf that wageswere high， and laborers in great demand on the sugarplantations in st. mary’s parish. this parish is situated onthe coast of the gulf of mexico， about one hundred andforty miles from avoyelles. the rio teche， a considerablestream， flows through st. mary’s to the gulf.
　　it was determined by the planters， on the receipt ofthis intelligence， to make up a drove of slaves to be sentdown to tuckapaw in st. mary’s， for the purpose of hiringthem out in the cane fields. accordingly， in the monthof september， there were one hundred and forty-sevencollected at holmesville， abram， bob and myself amongthe number. of these about one-half were women. epps，alonson pierce， henry toler， and addison roberts， werethe white men， selected to accompany， and take charge ofthe drove. they had a two-horse carriage and two saddlehorses for their use. a large wagon， drawn by four horses，and driven by john， a boy belonging to mr. roberts，carried the blankets and provisions.
　　about 2 o’clock in the afternoon， having been fed，preparations were made to depart. the duty assignedme was， to take charge of the blankets and provisions，and see that none were lost by the way. the carriageproceeded in advance， the wagon following； behindthis the slaves were arranged， while the two horsemenbrought up the rear， and in this order the processionmoved out of holmesville.
　　that night we reached a mr. mccrow’s plantation， adistance of ten or fifteen miles， when we were orderedto halt. large fires were built， and each one spreadinghis blanket on the ground， laid down upon it. the whitemen lodged in the great house. an hour before day wewere aroused by the drivers coming among us， crackingtheir whips and ordering us to arise. then the blanketswere rolled up， and being severally delivered to me anddeposited in the wagon， the procession set forth again.
　　the following night it rained violently. we were alldrenched， our clothes saturated with mud and water.
　　reaching an open shed， formerly a gin-house， we foundbeneath it such shelter as it afforded. there was not roomfor all of us to lay down. there we remained， huddledtogether， through the night， continuing our march， asusual， in the morning. during the journey we were fedtwice a day， boiling our bacon and baking our corn-cakeat the fires in the same manner as in our huts. we passedthrough lafayetteville， mountsville， new-town， tocentreville， where bob and uncle abram were hired. our
　　number decreased as we advanced—nearly every sugarplantation requiring the services of one or more.
　　on our route we passed the grand coteau or prairie， avast space of level， monotonous country， without a tree，except an occasional one which had been transplantednear some dilapidated dwelling. it was once thicklypopulated， and under cultivation， but for some causehad been abandoned. the business of the scatteredinhabitants that now dwell upon it is principally raisingcattle. immense herds were feeding upon it as we passed.
　　in the centre of the grand coteau one feels as if he wereon the ocean， out of sight of land. as far as the eye cansee， in all directions， it is but a ruined and deserted waste.
　　i was hired to judge turner， a distinguished man andextensive planter， whose large estate is situated on bayousalle， within a few miles of the gulf. bayou salle is a smallstream flowing into the bay of atchafalaya. for some daysi was employed at turner’s in repairing his sugar house，when a cane knife was put into my hand， and with thirtyor forty others， i was sent into the field. i found no suchdifficulty in learning the art of cutting cane that i had inpicking cotton. it came to me naturally and intuitively，and in a short time i was able to keep up with the fastestknife. before the cutting was over， however， judgetanner transferred me from the field to the sugar house，to act there in the capacity of driver. from the time of thecommencement of sugar making to the close， the grindingand boiling does not cease day or night. the whip was173
　　given me with directions to use it upon any one who wascaught standing idle. if i failed to obey them to the letter，there was another one for my own back. in addition tothis my duty was to call on and off the different gangsat the proper time. i had no regular periods of rest， andcould never snatch but a few moments of sleep at a time.
　　it is the custom in louisiana， as i presume it is inother slave states， to allow the slave to retain whatevercompensation he may obtain for services performedon sundays. in this way， only， are they able to providethemselves with any luxury or convenience whatever.
　　when a slave， purchased， or kidnapped in the north， istransported to a cabin on bayou boeuf he is furnishedwith neither knife， nor fork， nor dish， nor kettle， nor anyother thing in the shape of crockery， or furniture of anynature or description. he is furnished with a blanketbefore he reaches there， and wrapping that around him，he can either stand up， or lie down upon the ground， oron a board， if his master has no use for it. he is at libertyto find a gourd in which to keep his meal， or he can eathis corn from the cob， just as he pleases. to ask themaster for a knife， or skillet， or any small convenienceof the kind， would be answered with a kick， or laughedat as a joke. whatever necessary article of this nature isfound in a cabin has been purchased with sunday money.
　　however injurious to the morals， it is certainly a blessingto the physical condition of the slave， to be permittedto break the sabbath. otherwise there would be no way174
　　to provide himself with any utensils， which seem to beindispensable to him who is compelled to be his owncook.




第49章 Chapter XIV.(2)


　　on cane plantations in sugar time， there is no distinctionas to the days of the week. it is well understood that allhands must labor on the sabbath， and it is equally wellunderstood that those especially who are hired， as i wasto judge turner， and others in succeeding years， shallreceive remuneration for it. it is usual， also， in the mosthurrying time of cotton-picking， to require the same extraservice. from this source， slaves generally are affordedan opportunity of earning sufficient to purchase a knife， akettle， tobacco and so forth. the females， discarding thelatter luxury， are apt to expend their little revenue in thepurchase of gaudy ribbons， wherewithal to deck their hairin the merry season of the holidays.
　　i remained in st. mary’s until the first of january，during which time my sunday money amounted to tendollars. i met with other good fortune， for which i wasindebted to my violin， my constant companion， the sourceof profit， and soother of my sorrows during years ofservitude. there was a grand party of whites assembledat mr. yarney’s， in centreville， a hamlet in the vicinityof turner’s plantation. i was employed to play for them，and so well pleased were the merry-makers with myperformance， that a contribution was taken for mybenefit， which amounted to seventeen dollars.
　　with this sum in possession， i was looked upon by my fellows as a millionaire. it afforded me great pleasure tolook at it—to count it over and over again， day after day.
　　visions of cabin furniture， of water pails， of pocket knives，new shoes and coats and hats， floated through my fancy，and up through all rose the triumphant contemplation，that i was the wealthiest “nigger” on bayou boeuf.
　　vessels run up the rio teche to centreville. whilethere， i was bold enough one day to present myself beforethe captain of a steamer， and beg permission to hidemyself among the freight. i was emboldened to risk thehazard of such a step， from overhearing a conversation，in the course of which i ascertained he was a native oftile north. i did not relate to him the particulars of myhistory， but only expressed an ardent desire to escapefrom slavery to a free state. he pitied me， but said itwould be impossible to avoid the vigilant custom houseofficers in new-orleans， and that detection would subjecthim to punishment， and his vessel to confiscation. myearnest entreaties evidently excited his sympathies，and doubtless he would have yielded to them， could hehave done so with any kind of safety. i was compelled tosmother the sudden flame that lighted up my bosom withsweet hopes of liberation， and turn my steps once moretowards the increasing darkness of despair.
　　immediately after this event the drove assembled atcentreville， and several of the owners having arrived andcollected the monies due for our services， we were drivenback to bayou boeuf. it was on our return， while passing  through a small village， that i caught sight of tibeats，seated in the door of a dirty grocery， looking somewhatseedy and out of repair. passion and poor whisky， i doubtnot， have ere this laid him on the shelf.
　　during our absence， i learned from aunt phebe andpatsey， that the latter had been getting deeper and deeperinto trouble. the poor girl was truly an object of pity. “oldhogjaw，” the name by which epps was called， when theslaves were by themselves had beaten her more severelyand frequently than ever. as surely as he came fromholmesville， elated with liquor—and it was often in thosedays—he would whip her， merely to gratify the mistress；would punish her to an extent almost beyond endurance，for an offence of which he himself was the sole andirresistible cause. in his sober moments he could notalways be prevailed upon to indulge his wife’s insatiablethirst for vengeance.
　　to be rid of patsey—to place her beyond sight or reach，by sale， or death， or in any other manner， of late years，seemed to be the ruling thought and passion of my mistress.
　　patsey had been a favorite when a child， even in thegreat house. she had been petted and admired for heruncommon sprightliness and pleasant disposition. shehad been fed many a time， so uncle abram said， even onbiscuit and milk， when the madam， in her younger days，was wont to call her to the piazza， and fondle her as shewould a playful kitten. but a sad change had come overthe spirit of the woman. now， only black and angry fiends ministered in the temple of her heart， until she could lookon patsey but with concentrated venom.
　　mistress epps was not naturally such an evil woman，after all. she was possessed of the devil， jealousy， itis true， but aside from that， there was much in hercharacter to admire. her father， mr. roberts， residedin cheneyville， an influential and honorable man， andas much respected throughout the parish as any othercitizen. she had been well educated at some institutionthis side the mississippi； was beautiful， accomplished，and usually good-humored. she was kind to all of usbut patsey—frequently， in the absence of her husband，sending out to us some little dainty from her own table.
　　in other situations—in a different society from that whichexists on the shores of bayou boeuf， she would have beenpronounced an elegant and fascinating woman. an illwind it was that blew her into the arms of epps.
　　he respected and loved his wife as much as a coarsenature like his is capable of loving， but supreme selfishnessalways overmastered conjugal affection.
　　“he loved as well as baser natures can，
　　but a mean heart and soul were in that man.”
　　he was ready to gratify any whim—to grant any requestshe made， provided it did not cost too much. patsey wasequal to any two of his slaves in the cotton field. he couldnot replace her with the same money she would bring.
   



第50章 Chapter XIV.(3)


　　the idea of disposing of her， therefore， could not be entertained. the mistress did not regard her at all inthat light. the pride of the haughty woman was aroused；the blood of the fiery southern boiled at the sight ofpatsey， and nothing less than trampling out the life of thehelpless bondwoman would satisfy her.
　　sometimes the current of her wrath turned upon himwhom she had just cause to hate. but the storm of angrywords would pass over at length， and there would bea season of calm again. at such times patsey trembledwith fear， and cried as if her heart would break， for sheknew from painful experience， that if mistress shouldwork herself to the red-hot pitch of rage， epps wouldquiet her at last with a promise that patsey should beflogged a promise he was sure to keep. thus did pride，and jealousy， and vengeance war with avarice and brutepassionin the mansion of my master， filling it with
　　daily tumult and contention. thus， upon the head ofpatsey—the simpleminded slave， in whose heart godhad implanted the seeds of virtue—the force of all thesedomestic tempests spent itself at last.
　　during the summer succeeding my return from st.
　　mary’s parish， i conceived a plan of providing myselfwith food， which， though simple， succeeded beyondexpectation. it has been followed by many others in mycondition， up and down the bayou， and of such benefithas it become that i am almost persuaded to look uponmyself as a benefactor. that summer the worms got intothe bacon. nothing but ravenous hunger could induce
　　us to swallow it. the weekly allowance of meal scarcelysufficed to satisfy us. it was customary with us， as it iswith all in that region， where the allowance is exhaustedbefore saturday night， or is in such a state as to renderit nauseous and disgusting， to hunt in the swamps forcoon and opossum. this， however， must be done at night，after the day’s work is accomplished. there are planterswhose slaves， for months at a time， have no other meatthan such as is obtained in this manner. no objectionsare made to hunting， inasmuch as it dispenses with draftsupon the smoke-house， and because every maraudingcoon that is killed is so much saved from the standingcorn. they are hunted with dogs and clubs， slaves notbeing allowed the use of fire-arms.
　　the flesh of the coon is palatable， but verily thereis nothing in all butcherdom so delicious as a roasted’possum. they are a round， rather long-bodied， littleanimal， of a whitish color， with nose like a pig， and caudalextremity like a rat. they burrow among the roots andin the hollows of the gum tree， and are clumsy and slowof motion. they are deceitful and cunning creatures. onreceiving the slightest tap of a stick， they will roll over onthe ground and feign death. if the hunter leaves him， inpursuit of another， without first taking particular pains tobreak his neck， the chances are， on his return， he is not tobe found. the little animal has out witted the enemy—has“played ’possum” —and is off. but after a long and hardday’s work， the weary slave feels little like going to the swamp for his supper， and half the time prefers throwinghimself on the cabin floor without it. it is for the interestof the master that the servant should not suffer in healthfrom starvation， and it is also for his interest that heshould not become gross from over-feeding. in theestimation of the owner， a slave is the most serviceablewhen in rather a lean and lank condition， such a conditionas the race-horse is in， when fitted for the course， and inthat condition they are generally to be found on the sugarand cotton plantations along red river.
　　my cabin was within a few rods of the bayou bank， andnecessity being indeed the mother of invention， i resolvedupon a mode of obtaining the requisite amount of food，without the trouble of resorting nightly to the woods.
　　this was to construct a fish trap. having， in my mind，conceived the manner in which it could be done， the nextsunday i set about putting it into practical execution. itmay be impossible for me to convey to the reader a fulland correct idea of its construction， but the following willserve as a general deion：
　　a frame between two and three feet square is made，and of a greater or less height， according to the depth ofwater. boards or slats are nailed on three sides of thisframe， not so closely， however， as to prevent the watercirculating freely through it. a door is fitted into thefourth side， in such manner that it will slide easily upand down in the grooves cut in the two posts. a movablebottom is then so fitted that it can be raised to the top of  the frame without difficulty. in the centre of the movablebottom an auger hole is bored， and into this one end ofa handle or round stick is fastened on the under side soloosely that it will turn. the handle ascends from thecentre of the movable bottom to the top of the frame， oras much higher as is desirable. up and down this handle，in a great many places， are gimlet holes， through whichsmall sticks are inserted， extending to opposite sidesof the frame. so many of these small sticks are runningout from the handle in all directions， that a fish of anyconsiderable dimensions cannot pass through withouthitting one of them. the frame is then placed in the waterand made stationary.




第51章 Chapter XIV.(4)


　　the trap is “set” by sliding or drawing up the door， andkept in that position by another stick， one end of whichrests in a notch on the inner side， the other end in a notchmade in the handle， running up from the centre of themovable bottom. the trap is baited by rolling a handfulof wet meal and cotton together until it becomes hard，and depositing it in the back part of the frame. a fishswimming through the upraised door towards the bait，necessarily strikes one of the small sticks turning thehandle， which displacing the stick supporting the door，the latter falls， securing the fish within the frame. takinghold of the top of the handle， the movable bottom is thendrawn up to the surface of the water， and the fish takenout. there may have been other such traps in use beforemine was constructed， but if there were i had never happened to see one. bayou boeuf abounds in fish of largesize and excellent quality， and after this time i was veryrarely in want of one for myself， or for my comrades.
　　thus a mine was opened—a new resource was developed，hitherto unthought of by the enslaved children of africa，who toil and hunger along the shores of that sluggish， butprolific stream.
　　about the time of which i am now writing， an eventoccurred in our immediate neighborhood， which made adeep impression upon me， and which shows the state ofsociety existing there， and the manner in which affrontsare oftentimes avenged. directly opposite our quarters，on the other side of the bayou， was situated the plantationof mr. marshall. he belonged to a family among the mostwealthy and aristocratic in the country. a gentleman fromthe vicinity of natchez had been negotiating with him forthe purchase of the estate. one day a messenger came ingreat haste to our plantation， saying that a bloody andfearful battle was going on at marshall’s—that blood hadbeen spilled—and unless the combatants were forthwithseparated， the result would be disastrous.
　　on repairing to marshall’s house， a scene presenteditself that beggars deion. on the floor of one of therooms lay the ghastly corpse of the man from natchez，while marshall， enraged and covered with woundsand blood， was stalking back and forth， “breathing outthreatenings and slaughter.” a difficulty had arisen inthe course of their negotiation， high words ensued， when drawing their weapons， the deadly strife began thatended so unfortunately. marshall was never placed inconfinement. a sort of trial or investigation was had atmarksville， when he was acquitted， and returned to hisplantation， rather more respected， as i thought， thanever， from the fact that the blood of a fellow being was onhis soul.
　　epps interested himself in his behalf， accompanyinghim to marksville， and on all occasions loudly justifyinghim， but his services in this respect did not afterwardsdeter a kinsman of this same marshall from seeking hislife also. a brawl occurred between them over a gamblingtable，which terminated in a deadly feud. riding up onhorseback in front of the house one day， armed withpistols and bowie knife， marshall challenged him to comeforth and make a final settlement of the quarrel， or hewould brand him as a coward， and shoot him like a dogthe first opportunity. not through cowardice， nor fromany conscientious scruples， in my opinion， but throughthe influence of his wife， he was restrained from acceptingthe challenge of his enemy. a reconciliation， however，was effected afterward， since which time they have beenon terms of the closest intimacy.
　　such occurrences， which would bring upon the partiesconcerned in them merited and condign punishment inthe northern states， are frequent on the bayou， and passwithout notice， and almost without comment. every mancarries his bowie knife， and when two fall out， they set to work hacking and thrusting at each other， more likesavages than civilized and enlightened beings.
　　the existence of slavery in its most cruel form amongthem has a tendency to brutalize the humane and finerfeelings of their nature. daily witnesses of humansuffering—listening to the agonizing screeches of theslave—beholding him writhing beneath the mercilesslash—bitten and torn by dogs—dying without attention，and buried without shroud or coffin—it cannot otherwisebe expected， than that they should become brutified andreckless of human life. it is true there are many kindheartedand good men in the parish of avoyelles—suchmen as william ford—who can look with pity upon thesufferings of a slave， just as there are， over all the world，sensitive and sympathetic spirits， who cannot look withindifference upon the sufferings of any creature whichthe almighty has endowed with life. it is not the fault ofthe slaveholder that he is cruel， so much as it is the faultof the system under which he lives. he cannot withstandthe influence of habit and associations that surroundhim. taught from earliest childhood， by all that he seesand hears， that the rod is for the slave’s back， he will notbe apt to change his opinions in maturer years.
　　there may be humane masters， as there certainly areinhuman ones—there may be slaves well-clothed， wellfed，and happy， as there surely are those half-clad， halfstarvedand miserable； nevertheless， the institution
　　that tolerates such wrong and inhumanity as i have witnessed， is a cruel， unjust， and barbarous one. menmay write fictions portraying lowly life as it is， or as itis not—may expatiate with owlish gravity upon the blissof ignorance—discourse flippantly from arm chairs ofthe pleasures of slave life； but let them toil with him inthe field—sleep with him in the cabin—feed with him onhusks； let them behold him scourged， hunted， trampledon， and they will come back with another story in theirmouths. let them know the heart of the poor slave—learnhis secret thoughts—thoughts he dare not utter in thehearing of the white man； let them sit by him in thesilent watches of the night—converse with him in trustfulconfidence， of “life， liberty， and the pursuit of happiness，”
　　and they will find that ninety-nine out of every hundredare intelligent enough to understand their situation，and to cherish in their bosoms the love of freedom， aspassionately as themselves.
www、mdwenxue.com



第52章 Chapter XV.(1)


　　in consequence of my inability in cotton-picking， eppswas in the habit of hiring me out on sugar plantationsduring the season of cane-cutting and sugar-making. hereceived for my services a dollar a day， with the moneysupplying my place on his cotton plantation. cuttingcane was an employment that suited me， and for threesuccessive years i held the lead row at hawkins’， leadinga gang of from fifty to an hundred hands.
　　in a previous chapter the mode of cultivating cotton isdescribed. this may be the proper place to speak of themanner of cultivating cane.
　　the ground is prepared in beds， the same as it isprepared for the reception of the cotton seed， except it isploughed deeper. drills are made in the same manner.
　　planting commences in january， and continues untilapril. it is necessary to plant a sugar field only once inthree years. three crops are taken before the seed orplant is exhausted.
　　three gangs are employed in the operation. one drawsthe cane from the rick， or stack， cutting the top and flagsfrom the stalk， leaving only that part which is sound andhealthy. each joint of the cane has an eye， like the eye ofa potato， which sends forth a sprout when buried in the soil. another gang lays the cane in the drill， placing twostalks side by side in such manner that joints will occuronce in four or six inches. the third gang follows withhoes， drawing earth upon the stalks， and covering themto the depth of three inches.
　　in four weeks， at the farthest， the sprouts appearabove the ground， and from this time forward grow withgreat rapidity. a sugar field is hoed three times， the sameas cotton， save that a greater quantity of earth is drawnto the roots. by the first of august hoeing is usually over.
　　about the middle of september， whatever is required forseed is cut and stacked in ricks， as they are termed. inoctober it is ready for the mill or sugar-house， and thenthe general cutting begins. the blade of a cane-knife isfifteen inches long， three inches wide in the middle， andtapering towards the point and handle. the blade is thin，and in order to be at all serviceable must be kept verysharp. every third hand takes the lead of two others， oneof whom is on each side of him. the lead hand， in thefirst place， with a blow of his knife shears the flags fromthe stalk. he next cuts off the top down as far as it isgreen. he must be careful to sever all the green from theripe part， inasmuch as the juice of the former sours themolasses， and renders it unsalable. then he severs thestalk at the root， and lays it directly behind him. his rightand left hand companions lay their stalks， when cut inthe same manner， upon his. to every three hands there isa cart， which follows， and the stalks are thrown into it by the younger slaves， when it is drawn to the sugar-houseand ground.
　　if the planter apprehends a frost， the cane is winrowed.
　　winrowing is the cutting the stalks at an early period andthrowing them lengthwise in the water furrow in such amanner that the tops will cover the butts of the stalks.
　　they will remain in this condition three weeks or a monthwithout souring， and secure from frost. when the propertime arrives， they are taken up， trimmed and carted tothe sugarhouse.
　　in the month of january the slaves enter the field againto prepare for another crop. the ground is now strewnwith the tops， and flags cut from the past year’s cane.
　　on a dry day fire is set to this combustible refuse， whichsweeps over the field， leaving it bare and clean， and readyfor the hoes. the earth is loosened about the roots of theold stubble， and in process of time another crop springs upfrom the last year’s seed. it is the same the year following；but the third year the seed has exhausted its strength， andthe field must be ploughed and planted again. the secondyear the cane is sweeter and yields more than the first， andthe third year more than the second.
　　during the three seasons i labored on hawkins’
　　plantation， i was employed a considerable portion of thetime in the sugar-house. he is celebrated as the producerof the finest variety of white sugar. the following is ageneral deion of his sugar-house and the process ofmanufacture：
   http://



第53章 Chapter XV.(2)


　　the mill is an immense brick building， standing onthe shore of the bayou. running out from the buildingis an open shed， at least an hundred feet in length andforty or fifty feet in width. the boiler in which the steamis generated is situated outside the main building； themachinery and engine rest on a brick pier， fifteen feetabove the floor， within the body of the building. themachinery turns two great iron rollers， between two andthree feet in diameter and six or eight feet in length. theyare elevated above the brick pier， and roll in towardseach other. an endless carrier， made of chain and wood，like leathern belts used in small mills， extends fromthe iron rollers out of the main building and throughthe entire length of the open shed. the carts in whichthe cane is brought from the field as fast as it is cut， areunloaded at the sides of the shed. all along the endlesscarrier are ranged slave children， whose business it isto place the cane upon it， when it is conveyed throughthe shed into the main building， where it falls betweenthe rollers， is crushed， and drops upon another carrierthat conveys it out of the main building in an oppositedirection， depositing it in the top of a chimney upon afire beneath， which consumes it. it is necessary to burnit in this manner， because otherwise it would soon fillthe building， and more especially because it would soonsour and engender disease. the juice of the cane falls intoa conductor underneath the iron rollers， and is carriedinto a reservoir. pipes convey it from thence into fivefilterers， holding several hogsheads each. these filterersare filled with bone-black， a substance resemblingpulverized charcoal. it is made of bones calcinated inclose vessels， and is used for the purpose of decolorizing，by filtration， the cane juice before boiling. through thesefive filterers it passes in succession， and then runs intoa large reservoir underneath the ground floor， fromwhence it is carried up， by means of a steam pump， intoa clarifier made of sheet iron， where it is heated by steamuntil it boils. from the first clarifier it is carried in pipesto a second and a third， and thence into close iron pans，through which tubes pass， filled with steam. while in aboiling state it flows through three pans in succession，and is then carried in other pipes down to the coolers onthe ground floor. coolers are wooden boxes with sievebottoms made of the finest wire. as soon as the syruppasses into the coolers， and is met by the air， it grains，and the molasses at once escapes through the sieves intoa cistern below. it is then white or loaf sugar of the finestkind—clear， clean， and as white as snow. when cool， it istaken out， packed in hogsheads， and is ready for market.
　　the molasses is then carried from the cistern into theupper story again， and by another process converted intobrown sugar.
　　there are larger mills， and those constructed differentlyfrom the one thus imperfectly described， but none，perhaps， more celebrated than this anywhere on bayouboeuf. lambert， of new-orleans， is a partner of hawkins.
　　he is a man of vast wealth， holding， as i have been told，an interest in over forty different sugar plantations inlouisiana.
　　the only respite from constant labor the slave hasthrough the whole year， is during the christmas holidays.
　　epps allowed us three—others allow four， five and sixdays， according to the measure of their generosity. it isthe only time to which they look forward with any interestor pleasure. they are glad when night comes， not onlybecause it brings them a few hours repose， but because itbrings them one day nearer christmas. it is hailed withequal delight by the old and the young； even uncle abramceases to glorify andrew jackson， and patsey forgets hermany sorrows amid the general hilarity of the holidays.
　　it is the time of feasting， and frolicking， and fiddling—the carnival season with the children of bondage. theyare the only days when they are allowed a little restrictedliberty， and heartily indeed do they enjoy it.
　　it is the custom for one planter to give a “christmassupper，” inviting the shaves from neighboring plantationsto join his own on the occasion； for instance， one yearit is given by epps， the next by marshall， the next byhawkins， and so on. usually from three to five hundredare assembled， coming together on foot， in carts， onhorseback， on mules， riding double and triple， sometimesa boy and girl， at others a girl and two boys， and at others again a boy， a girl and an old woman. uncle abramastride a mule， with aunt phebe and patsey behindhim， trotting towards a christmas supper， would be nouncommon sight on bayou boeuf.
　　then， too， “of all days i’ the year，” they array themselvesin their best attire. the cotton coat has been washedclean， the stump of a tallow candle has been applied tothe shoes， and if so fortunate as to possess a rimless ora crownless hat， it is placed jauntily on the head. theyare welcomed with equal cordiality， however， if theycome bare-headed and bare-footed to the feast. as ageneral thing， the women wear handkerchiefs tied abouttheir heads， but if chance has thrown in their way afiery red ribbon， or a cast-off bonnet of their mistress’
　　grandmother， it is sure to be worn on such occasions.
　　red—the deep blood red—is decidedly the favorite coloramong the enslaved damsels of my acquaintance. if ared ribbon does not encircle the neck， you will be certainto find all the hair of their woolly heads tied up with redstrings of one sort or another.
   http://www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ



第54章 Chapter XV.(3)


　　the table is spread in the open air， and loaded withvarieties of meat and piles of vegetables. bacon and cornmeal at such times are dispensed with. sometimes thecooking is performed in the kitchen on the plantation， atothers in the shade of wide branching trees. in the lattercase， a ditch is dug in the ground， and wood laid in andburned until it is filled with glowing coals， over whichchickens， ducks， turkeys， pigs， and not unfrequently the entire body of a wild ox， are roasted. they are furnishedalso with flour， of which biscuits are made， and often withpeach and other preserves， with tarts， and every mannerand deion of pies， except the mince， that being anarticle of pastry as yet unknown among them. only theslave who has lived all the years on his scanty allowanceof meal and bacon， can appreciate such suppers. whitepeople in great numbers assemble to witness thegastronomical enjoyments.
　　they seat themselves at the rustic table—the maleson one side， the females on the other. the two betweenwhom there may have been an exchange of tenderness，invariably manage to sit opposite； for the omnipresentcupid disdains not to hurl his arrows into the simplehearts of slaves. unalloyed and exulting happiness lightsup the dark faces of them all. the ivory teeth， contrastingwith their black complexions， exhibit two long， whitestreaks the whole extent of the table. all round thebountiful board a multitude of eyes roll in ecstacy.
　　giggling and laughter and the clattering of cutlery andcrockery succeed. cuffee’s elbow hunches his neighbor’sside， impelled by an involuntary impulse of delight； nellyshakes her finger at sambo and laughs， she knows notwhy， and so the fun and merriment flows on.
　　when the viands have disappeared， and the hungrymaws of the children of toil are satisfied， then， next in theorder of amusement， is the christmas dance. my businesson these gala days always was to play on the violin. the african race is a music-loving one， proverbially； andmany there were among my fellow—bondsmen whoseorgans of tune were strikingly developed， and who couldthumb the banjo with dexterity； but at the expense ofappearing egotistical， i must， nevertheless， declare， thati was considered the ole bull of bayou boeuf. my masteroften received letters， sometimes from a distance of tenmiles， requesting him to send me to play at a ball orfestival of the whites. he received his compensation， andusually i also returned with many picayunes jingling inmy pockets—the extra contributions of those to whosedelight i had administered. in this manner i becamemore acquainted than i otherwise would， up and downthe bayou. the young men and maidens of holmesvillealways knew there was to be a jollification somewhere，whenever platt epps was seen passing through the townwith his fiddle in his hand. “where are you going now，platt？” and “what is coming off tonight， platt？” would beinterrogatories issuing from every door and window， andmany a time when there was no special hurry， yieldingto pressing importunities， platt would draw his bow， andsitting astride his mule， perhaps， discourse musically to acrowd of delighted children， gathered around him in thestreet.
　　alas！ had it not been for my beloved violin， i scarcelycan conceive how i could have endured the long yearsof bondage. it introduced me to great houses —relievedme of many days’ labor in the field—supplied me with conveniences for my cabin—with pipes and tobacco，and extra pairs of shoes， and oftentimes led me awayfrom the presence of a hard master， to witness scenesof jollity and mirth. it was my companion—the friendof my bosom triumphing loudly when i was joyful， anduttering its soft， melodious consolations when i wassad. often， at midnight， when sleep had fled affrightedfrom the cabin， and my soul was disturbed and troubledwith the contemplation of my fate， it would sing me asong of peace. on holy sabbath days， when an hour ortwo of leisure was allowed， it would accompany me tosome quiet place on the bayou bank， and， lifting up itsvoice， discourse kindly and pleasantly indeed. it heraldedmy name round the country—made me friends， who，otherwise would not have noticed me—gave me anhonored seat at the yearly feasts， and secured the loudestand heartiest welcome of them all at the christmas dance.
　　the christmas dance！ oh， ye pleasure-seeking sons anddaughters of idleness， who move with measured step，listless and snail-like， through the slow-winding cotillon，if ye wish to look upon the celerity， if not the “poetryof motion” —upon genuine happiness， rampant andunrestrained—go down to louisiana， and see the slavesdancing in the starlight of a christmas night.
下+书+网



第55章 Chapter XV.(4)


　　on that particular christmas i have now in my mind， adeion whereof will serve as a deion of the daygenerally， miss lively and mr. sam， the first belonging tostewart， the latter to roberts， started the ball. it was well    known that sam cherished an ardent passion for lively，as also did one of marshall’s and another of carey’sboys； for lively was lively indeed， and a heart-breakingcoquette withal. it was a victory for sam roberts， when，rising from the repast， she gave him her hand for the first“figure” in preference to either of his rivals. they weresomewhat crest-fallen， and， shaking their heads angrily，rather intimated they would like to pitch into mr. samand hurt him badly. but not an emotion of wrath ruffledthe placid bosom of samuel as his legs flew like drumsticksdown the outside and up the middle， by the sideof his bewitching partner. the whole company cheeredthem vociferously， and， excited with the applause， theycontinued “tearing down” after all the others had becomeexhausted and halted a moment to recover breath. butsam’s superhuman exertions overcame him finally，leaving lively alone， yet whirling like a top. thereuponone of sam’s rivals， pete marshall， dashed in， and， withmight and main， leaped and shuffled and threw himselfinto every conceivable shape， as if determined to showmiss lively and all the world that sam roberts was of noaccount.
　　pete’s affection， however， was greater than his discretion.
　　such violent exercise took the breath out of him directly，and he dropped like an empty bag. then was the timefor harry carey to try his hand； but lively also soon outwindedhim， amidst hurrahs and shouts， fully sustaining her well-earned reputation of being the “fastest gal” onthe bayou.
　　one “set” off， another takes its place， he or she remaininglongest on the floor receiving the most uproariouscommendation， and so the dancing continues until broaddaylight. it does not cease with the sound of the fiddle，but in that case they set up a music peculiar to themselves.
　　this is called “patting，” accompanied with one of thoseunmeaning songs， composed rather for its adaptation to acertain tune or measure， than for the purpose of expressingany distinct idea. the patting is performed by striking thehands on the knees， then striking the hands together， thenstriking the right shoulder with one hand， the left withthe other—all the while keeping time with the feet， andsinging， perhaps， this song：
　　“harper’s creek and roarin’ ribber，
　　thar， my dear， we’ll live forebber；
　　den we’ll go to de ingin nation，
　　all i walls in dis creation，
　　is pretty little wife and big plantation.
　　chorus. up dat oak and down dat ribber，
　　two overseers and one little nigger”
　　or， if these words are not adapted to the tune calledfor， it may be that “old hog eye” is—a rather solemnand startling specimen of versification， not， however， tobe appreciated unless heard at the south. it runneth asfollows：
　　“who’s been here since i’ve been gone？
　　pretty little gal wid a josey on.
　　hog eye！
　　old hog eye，
　　and hosey too！
　　never see de like since i was born，
　　here come a little gal wid a josey on.
　　hog eye！
　　old hog eye！
　　and hosey too！”
　　or， may be the following， perhaps， equally nonsensical，but full of melody， nevertheless， as it flows from the negro’smouth：
　　“ebo dick and jurdan’s jo，
　　them two niggers stole my yo’.
　　chorus. hop jim along，
　　walk jim along，
　　talk jim along，” &c.
　　“old black dan， as black as tar，
　　he dam glad he was not dar.
　　hop jim along，” &c.
　　during the remaining holidays succeeding christmas，they are provided with passes， and permitted to go wherethey please within a limited distance， or they may remainand labor on the plantation， in which case they are paidfor it. it is very rarely， however， that the latter alternativeis accepted. they may be seen at these times hurrying in199
　　all directions， as happy looking mortals as can be foundon the face of the earth. they are different beings fromwhat they are in the field； the temporary relaxation， thebrief deliverance from fear， and from the lash， producingan entire metamorphosis in their appearance anddemeanor. in visiting， riding， renewing old friendships，or， perchance， reviving some old attachment， or pursuingwhatever pleasure may suggest itself； the time isoccupied. such is “southern life as it is，” three days in theyear， as i found it— the other three hundred and sixtytwobeing days of weariness， and fear， and suffering， andunremitting labor.
　　marriage is frequently contracted during the holidays，if such an institution may be said to exist among them.
　　the only ceremony required before entering into that“holy estate，” is to obtain the consent of the respectiveowners. it is usually encouraged by the masters offemale slaves. either party can have as many husbandsor wives as the owner will permit， and either is at libertyto discard the other at pleasure. the law in relation todivorce， or to bigamy， and so forth， is not applicable toproperty， of course. if the wife does not belong on thesame plantation with the husband， the latter is permittedto visit her on saturday nights， if the distance is not toofar. uncle abram’s wife lived seven miles from epps’， onbayou huff power. he had permission to visit her once afortnight， but he was growing old， as has been said， andtruth to say， had latterly well nigh forgotten her. uncle abram had no time to spare from his meditations ongeneral jackson—connubial dalliance being well enoughfor the young and thoughtless， but unbecoming a graveand solemn philosopher like himself.




第56章 Chapter XVI.(1)


　　with the exception of my trip to st. mary’s parish，and my absence during the cane-cutting seasons， i wasconstantly employed on the plantation of master epps.
　　he was considered but a small planter， not having asufficient number of hands to require the services of anoverseer， acting in the latter capacity himself. not ableto increase his force， it was his custom to hire during thehurry of cotton-picking.
　　on larger estates， employing fifty or a hundred， orperhaps two hundred hands， an overseer is deemedindispensable. these gentlemen ride into the field onhorseback， without an exception， to my knowledge，armed with pistols， bowie knife， whip， and accompaniedby several dogs. they follow， equipped in this fashion，in rear of the slaves， keeping a sharp lookout upon themall. the requisite qualifications in an overseer are utterheartlessness， brutality and cruelty. it is his businessto produce large crops， and if that is accomplished， nomatter what amount of suffering it may have cost. thepresence of the dogs are necessary to overhaul a fugitivewho may take to his heels， as is sometimes the case， whenfaint or sick， he is unable to maintin his row， and unable，also， to endure the whip. the pistols are reserved for any dangerous emergency， there having been instances whensuch weapons were necessary. goaded into uncontrollablemadness， even the slave will sometimes turn upon hisoppressor. the gallows were standing at marksville lastjanuary， upon which one was executed a year ago forkilling his overseer. it occurred not many miles fromepps’ plantation on red river. the slave was givenhis task at splitting rails. in the course of the day theoverseer sent him on an errand， which occupied so muchtime that it was not possible for him to perform the task.
　　the next day he was called to an account， but the loss oftime occasioned by the errand was no excuse， and he wasordered to kneel and bare his back for the reception ofthe lash. they were in the woods alone—beyond the reachof sight or hearing. the boy submitted until maddenedat such injustice， and insane with pain， he sprang to hisfeet， and seizing an axe， literally chopped the overseer inpieces. he made no attempt whatever at concealment，but hastening to his master， related the whole affair，and declared himself ready to expiate the wrong by thesacrifice of his life. he was led to the scaffold， and whilethe rope was around his neck， maintained an undismayedand fearless bearing， and with his last words justified theact.
　　besides the overseer， there are drivers under him，the number being in proportion to the number of handsin the field. the drivers are black， who， in additionto the performance of their equal share of work， are compelled to do the whipping of their several gangs.
　　whips hang around their necks， and if they fail to usethem thoroughly， are whipped themselves. they havea few privileges， however； for example， in cane-cuttingthe hands are not allowed to sit down long enough toeat their dinners. carts filled with corn cake， cooked atthe kitchen， are driven into the field at noon. the cakeis distributed by the drivers， and must be eaten with theleast possible delay.
　　when the slave ceases to perspire， as he often doeswhen taxed beyond his strength， he falls to the groundand becomes entirely helpless. it is then the duty of thedriver to drag him into the shade of the standing cottonor cane， or of a neighboring tree， where he dashes bucketsof water upon him， and uses other means of bringing outperspiration again， when he is ordered to his place， andcompelled to continue his labor.
　　at huff power， when i first came to epps’， tom， oneof roberts’ negroes， was driver. he was a burly fellow，and severe in the extreme. after epps’ removal to bayouboeuf， that distinguished honor was conferred uponmyself. up to the time of my departure i had to wear awhip about my neck in the field. if epps was present，i dared not show any lenity， not having the christianfortitude of a certain well-known uncle tom sufficientlyto brave his wrath， by refusing to perform the office.
　　in that way， only， i escaped the immediate martyrdomhe suffered， and， withal， saved my companions muchsuffering， as it proved in the end. epps， i soon found，whether actually in the field or not， had his eyes prettygenerally upon us. from the piazza， from behind someadjacent tree， or other concealed point of observation，he was perpetually on the watch. if one of us had beenbackward or idle through the day， we were apt to be toldall about it on returning to the quarters， and as it was amatter of principle with him to reprove every offence ofthat kind that came within his knowledge， the offendernot only was certain of receiving a castigation for histardiness， but i likewise was punished for permitting it.
　　if， on the other hand， he had seen me use the lashfreely， the man was satisfied. “practice makes perfect，”
　　truly； and during my eight years’ experience as a driver， ilearned to handle the whip with marvelous dexterity andprecision， throwing the lash within a hair’s breadth of theback， the ear， the nose， without， however， touching eitherof them. if epps was observed at a distance， or we hadreason to apprehend he was sneaking somewhere in thevicinity， i would commence plying the lash vigorously，when， according to arrangement， they would squirm andscreech as if in agony， although not one of them had infact been even grazed. patsey would take occasion， if hemade his appearance presently， to mumble in his hearingsome complaints that platt was lashing them the wholetime， and uncle abram， with an appearance of honestypeculiar to himself， would declare roundly i had justwhipped them worse than general jackson whipped the   enemy at new-orleans. if epps was not drunk， and in oneof his beastly humors， this was， in general， satisfactory. ifhe was， some one or more of us must suffer， as a matterof course. sometimes his violence assumed a dangerousform， placing the lives of his human stock in jeopardy.
   www.7wenxＵe.com



第57章 Chapter XVI.(2)


　　on one occasion the drunken madman thought to amusehimself by cutting my throat.
　　he had been absent at holmesville， in attendanceat a shooting-match， and none of us were aware of hisreturn. while hoeing by the side of patsey， she exclaimed，in a low voice， suddenly， “platt， d’ye see old hog-jawbeckoning me to come to him？”
　　glancing sideways， i discovered him in the edge ofthe field， motioning and grimacing， as was his habitwhen half-intoxicated. aware of his lewd intentions，patsey began to cry. i whispered her not to look up， andto continue at her work， as if she had not observed him.
　　suspecting the truth of the matter， however， he soonstaggered up to me in a great rage.
　　“what did you say to pats？” he demanded， with anoath. i made him some evasive answer， which only hadthe effect of increasing his violence.
　　“how long have you owned this plantation， say， youd—d nigger？” he inquired， with a malicious sneer， at thesame time taking hold of my shirt collar with one hand，and thrusting the other into his pocket. “now i’ll cut yourblack throat； that’s what i’ll do，” drawing his knife fromhis pocket as he said it. but with one hand he was unable206
　　to open it， until finally seizing the blade in his teeth， isaw he was about to succeed， and felt the necessity ofescaping from him， for in his present reckless state， itwas evident he was not joking， by any means. my shirtwas open in front， and as i turned round quickly andsprang from him， while he still retained his gripe， it wasstripped entirely from my back. there was no difficultynow in eluding him. he would chase me until out ofbreath， then stop until it was recovered， swear， and renewthe chase again. now he would command me to cometo him， now endeavor to coax me， but i was careful tokeep at a respectful distance. in this manner we madethe circuit of the field several times， he making desperateplunges， and i always dodging them， more amused thanfrightened， well knowing that when his sober sensesreturned， he would laugh at his own drunken folly. atlength i observed the mistress standing by the yard fence，watching our half-serious， half-comical manoeuvres.
　　shooting past him， i ran directly to her. epps， ondiscovering her， did not follow. he remained about thefield an hour or more， during which time i stood by themistress， having related the particulars of what hadtaken place. now， she was aroused again， denouncingher husband and patsey about equally. finally， eppscame towards the house， by this time nearly sober，walking demurely， with his hands behind his back， andattempting to look as innocent as a child.
　　as he approached， nevertheless， mistress epps beganto berate him roundly， heaping upon him many ratherdisrespectful epithets， and demanding for what reasonhe had attempted to cut my throat. epps made wondrousstrange of it all， and to my surprise， swore by all thesaints in the calendar he had not spoken to me that day.
　　“platt， you lying nigger， have i？” was his brazen appealto me.
　　it is not safe to contradict a master， even by the assertionof a truth. so i was silent， and when he entered the house ireturned to the field， and the affair was never after alluded to.
　　shortly after this time a circumstance occurred thatcame nigh divulging the secret of my real name andhistory， which i had so long and carefully concealed， andupon which i was convinced depended my final escape.
　　soon after he purchased me， epps asked me if i couldwrite and read， and on being informed that i had receivedsome instruction in those branches of education， heassured me， with emphasis， if he ever caught me with abook， or with pen and ink， he would give me a hundredlashes. he said he wanted me to understand that hebought “niggers” to work and not to educate. he neverinquired a word of my past life， or from whence i came.
　　the mistress， however， cross-examined me frequentlyabout washington， which she supposed was my nativecity， and more than once remarked that i did not talk noract like the other “niggers，” and she was sure i had seenmore of the world than i admitted.
　　my great object always was to invent means of gettinga letter secretly into the post-office， directed to someof my friends or family at the north. the difficulty ofsuch an achievement cannot be comprehended by oneunacquainted with the severe restrictions imposedupon me. in the first place， i was deprived of pen， ink，and paper. in the second place， a slave cannot leave hisplantation without a pass， nor will a post-master maila letter for one without written instructions from hisowner. i was in slavery nine years， and always watchfuland on the alert， before i met with the good fortune ofobtaining a sheet of paper. while epps was in new-orleans， one winter， disposing of his cotton， the mistresssent me to holmesville， with an order for several articles，and among the rest a quantity of foolscap. i appropriateda sheet， concealing it in the cabin， under the board onwhich i slept.
　　after various experiments i succeeded in making ink，by boiling white maple bark， and with a feather pluckedfrom the wing of a duck， manufactured a pen. when allwere asleep in the cabin， by the light of the coals， lyingupon my plank couch， i managed to complete a somewhatlengthy epistle. it was directed to an old acquaintanceat sandy hill， stating my condition， and urging him totake measures to restore me to liberty. this letter i kepta long time， contriving measures by which it could besafely deposited in the post-office. at length， a low fellow，by the name of armsby， hitherto a stranger， came into   the neighborhood， seeking a situation as overseer. heapplied to epps， and was about the plantation for severaldays. he next went over to shaw’s， near by， and remainedwith him several weeks. shaw was generally surroundedby such worthless characters， being himself noted as agambler and unprincipled man. he had made a wife ofhis slave charlotte， and a brood of young mulattoes weregrowing up in his house. armsby became so much reducedat last， that he was compelled to labor with the slaves.
www.7wenxue.com



第58章 Chapter XVI.(3)


　　a white man working in the field is a rare and unusualspectacle on bayou boeuf. i improved every opportunityof cultivating his acquaintance privately， desiring toobtain his confidence so far as to be willing to intrust theletter to his keeping. he visited marksville repeatedly， heinformed me， a town some twenty miles distant， and there，i proposed to myself， the letter should be mailed.
　　carefully deliberating on the most proper manner ofapproaching him on the subject， i concluded finally toask him simply if he would deposit a letter for me in themarksville post-office the next time he visited that place，without disclosing to him that the letter was written， orany of the particulars it contained； for i had fears thathe might betray me， and knew that some inducementmust be held out to him of a pecuniary nature， before itwould be safe to confide in him. as late as one o’clockone night i stole noiselessly from my cabin， and， crossingthe field to shaw’s， found him sleeping on the piazza. ihad but a few picayunes—the proceeds of my fiddlingperformances， but all i had in the world i promised himif he would do me the favor required. i begged him not toexpose me if he could not grant the request. he assuredme， upon his honor， he would deposit it in the marksvillepost-office， and that he would keep it an inviolable secretforever. though the letter was in my pocket at the time，i dared not then deliver it to him， but stating i wouldhave it written in a day or two， bade him good night， andreturned to my cabin. it was impossible for me to expelthe suspicions i entertained， and all night i lay awake，revolving in my mind the safest course to pursue. i waswilling to risk a great deal to accomplish my purpose，but should the letter by any means fall into the hands ofepps， it would be a death-blow to my aspirations. i was“perplexed in the extreme.”
　　my suspicions were well-founded， as the sequeldemonstrated. the next day but one， while scrapingcotton in the field， epps seated himself on the line fencebetween shaw’s plantation and his own， in such a positionas to overlook the scene of our labors. presently armsbymade his appearance， and， mounting the fence， took aseat beside him. they remained two or three hours， all ofwhich time i was in an agony of apprehension.
　　that night， while broiling my bacon， epps entered thecabin with his rawhide in his hand.
　　“well， boy，” said he， “i understand i’ve got a larnednigger， that writes letters， and tries to get white fellows tomail ’em. wonder if you know who he is？”
　　my worst fears were realized， and although it maynot be considered entirely creditable， even under thecircumstances， yet a resort to duplicity and downrightfalsehood was the only refuge that presented itself.
/



第59章 Chapter XVI.(4)


　　“don’t know nothing about it， master epps，” ianswered him， assuming an air of ignorance and surprise；“don’t know nothing at all about it， sir.”
　　“wan’t you over to shaw’s night before last？” he inquired.
　　“no， master，” was the reply.
　　“hav’nt you asked that fellow， armsby， to mail a letterfor you at marksville？”
　　“why， lord， master， i never spoke three words to himin all my life. i don’t know what you mean.”
　　“well，” he continued， “armsby told me to-day thedevil was among my niggers； that i had one that neededclose watching or he would run away； and when i axedhim why， he said you come over to shaw’s， and wakedhim up in the night， and wanted him to carry a letter tomarksville. what have you got to say to that， ha？”
　　“all i’ve got to say， master，” i replied， “is， there is notruth in it. how could i write a letter without any inkor paper？ there is nobody i want to write to， ’cause ihaint got no friends living as i know of. that armsby is alying， drunken fellow， they say， and nobody believes himanyway. you know i always tell the truth， and that i nevergo off the plantation without a pass. now， master， i cansee what that armsby is after， plain enough. did’nt hewant you to hire him for an overseer？”
　　“yes， he wanted me to hire him，” answered epps.
　　“that’s it，” said i， “he wants to make you believe we’reall going to run away， and then he thinks you’ll hire anoverseer to watch us. he just made that story out ofwhole cloth， ’cause he wants to get a situation. it’s all alie， master， you may depend on’t.”
　　epps mused awhile， evidently impressed with theplausibility of my theory， and exclaimed.
　　“i’m d--d， platt， if i don’t believe you tell the truth. hemust take me for a soft， to think he can come it over mewith them kind of yarns， musn’t he？ maybe he thinks hecan fool me； maybe he thinks i don’t know nothing—can’ttake care of my own niggers， eh！ soft soap old epps， eh！
　　ha， ha， ha！ d—n armsby！ set the dogs on him， platt，”
　　and with many other comments descriptive of armsby’sgeneral character， and his capability of taking care of hisown business， and attending to his own “niggers，” masterepps left the cabin. as soon as he was gone i threw theletter in the fire， and， with a desponding and despairingheart， beheld the epistle which had cost me so muchanxiety and thought， and which i fondly hoped wouldhave been my forerunner to the land of freedom， writheand shrivel on its bed of coals， and dissolve into smokeand ashes. armsby， the treacherous wretch， was drivenfrom shaw’s plantation not long subsequently， much tomy relief， for i feared he might renew his conversation，and perhaps induce epps to credit him.
　　i knew not now whither to look for deliverance. hopessprang up in my heart only to be crushed and blighted. thesummer of my life was passing away； i felt i was growingprematurely old； that a few years more， and toil， andgrief， and the poisonous miasma of the swamps wouldaccomplish their work on me—would consign me to thegrave’s embrace， to moulder and be forgotten. repelled，betrayed， cut off from the hope of succor， i could onlyprostrate myself upon the earth and groan in unutterableanguish. the hope of rescue was the only light that casta ray of comfort on my heart. that was now flickering，faint and low； another breath of disappointment wouldextinguish it altogether， leaving me to grope in midnightdarkness to the end of life.
下+书+网



第60章 Chapter XVII.(1)


　　the year 1850， down to which time i have now arrived，omitting many occurrences uninteresting to the reader，was an unlucky year for my companion wiley， thehusband of phebe， whose taciturn and retiring nature hasthus far kept him in the background. notwithstandingwiley seldom opened his mouth， and revolved in hisobscure and unpretending orbit without a grumble，nevertheless the warm elements of sociality were strongin the bosom of that silent “nigger” in the exuberance ofhis self-reliance， disregarding the philosophy of uncleabram， and setting the counsels of aunt phebe utterly atnaught， he had the fool-hardiness to essay a nocturnalvisit to a neighboring cabin without a pass.
　　so attractive was the society in which he foundhimself， that wiley took little note of the passing hours，and the light began to break in the east before he wasaware. speeding homeward as fast as he could run， hehoped to reach the quarters before the horn would sound；but， unhappily， he was spied on the way by a company ofpatrollers.
　　how it is in other dark places of slavery， i do not know，but on bayou boeuf there is an organization of patrollers，as they are styled， whose business it is to seize and whip any slave they may find wandering from the plantation.
　　they ride on horseback， headed by a captain， armed，and accompanied by dogs. they have the right， eitherby law， or by general consent， to inflict discretionarychastisement upon a black man caught beyond theboundaries of his master’s estate without a pass， and evento shoot him， if he attempts to escape. each companyhas a certain distance to ride up and down the bayou.
　　they are compensated by the planters， who contribute inproportion to the number of slaves they own. the clatterof their horses’ hoofs dashing by can be heard at all hoursof the night， and frequently they may be seen drivinga slave before them， or leading him by a rope fastenedaround his neck， to his owner’s plantation.
　　wiley fled before one of these companies， thinking hecould reach his cabin before they could overtake him； butone of their dogs， a great ravenous hound， griped him bythe leg， and held him fast. the patrollers whipped himseverely， and brought him， a prisoner， to epps. fromhim he received another flagellation still more severe， sothat the cuts of the lash and the bites of the dog renderedhim sore， stiff， and miserable， insomuch he was scarcelyable to move. it was impossible in such a state to keepup his row， and consequently there was not an hour inthe day but wiley felt the sting of his master’s rawhideon his raw and bleeding back. his sufferings becameintolerable， and finally he resolved to run away. withoutdisclosing his intentions to run away even to his wife phebe， he proceeded to make arrangements for carryinghis plan into execution. having cooked his whole week’sallowance， he cautiously left the cabin on a sunday night，after the inmates of the quarters were asleep. when thehorn sounded in the morning， wiley did not make hisappearance. search was made for him in the cabins， inthe corn-crib， in the cotton-house， and in every nookand corner of the premises. each of us was examined，touching any knowledge we might have that couldthrow light upon his sudden disappearance or presentwhereabouts. epps raved and stormed， and mountinghis horse， galloped to neighboring plantations， makingin inquiries in all directions. the search was fruitless.
　　nothing whatever was elicited， going to show what hadbecome of the missing man. the dogs were led to theswamp， but were unable to strike his trail. they wouldcircle away through the forest， their noses to the ground，but invariably returned in a short time to the spot fromwhence they started.
　　wiley had escaped， and so secretly and cautiouslyas to elude and baffle all pursuit. days and even weekspassed away， and nothing could be heard of him. eppsdid nothing but curse and swear. it was the only topicof conversation among us when alone. we indulged in agreat deal of speculation in regard to him， one suggestinghe might have been drowned in some bayou， inasmuchas he was a poor swimmer； another， that perhaps hemight have been devoured by alligators， or stung by the    venomous moccasin， whose bite is certain and suddendeath. the warm and hearty sympathies of us all，however， were with poor wiley， wherever he might be.
　　many an earnest prayer ascended from the lips of uncleabram， beseeching safety for the wanderer.
　　in about three weeks， when all hope of ever seeing himagain was dismissed， to our surprise， he one day appearedamong us. on leaving the plantation， he informed us，it was his intention to make his way back to southcarolina—to the old quarters of master buford. duringthe day he remained secreted， sometimes in the branchesof a tree， and at night pressed forward through theswamps. finally， one morning， just at dawn， he reachedthe shore of red river. while standing on the bank，considering how he could cross it， a white man accostedhim， and demanded a pass. without one， and evidentlya runaway， he was taken to alexandria， the shire townof the parish of rapides， and confined in prison. ithappened several days after that joseph b. roberts， uncleof mistress epps， was in alexandria， and going into thejail， recognized him. wiley had worked on his plantation，when epps resided at huff power. paying the jail fee，and writing him a pass， underneath which was a noteto epps， requesting him not to whip him on his return，wiley was sent back to bayou boeuf. it was the hope thathung upon this request， and which roberts assured himwould be respected by his master， that sustained himas he approached the house. the request， however， as  may be readily supposed， was entirely disregarded. afterbeing kept in suspense three days， wiley was stripped，and compelled to endure one of those inhuman floggingsto which the poor slave is so often subjected. it was thefirst and last attempt of wiley to run away. the long scarsupon his back， which he will carry with him to the grave，perpetually remind him of the dangers of such a step.
下 ?^书? 网



第61章 Chapter XVII.(2)


　　there was not a day throughout the ten years ibelonged to epps that i did not consult with myself uponthe prospect of escape. i laid many plans， which at thetime i considered excellent ones， but one after the otherthey were all abandoned. no man who has never beenplaced in such a situation， can comprehend the thousandobstacles thrown in the way of the flying slave. everywhite man’s hand is raised against him —the patrollersare watching for him—the hounds are ready to followon his track， and the nature of the country is such asrenders it impossible to pass through it with any safety.
　　i thought， however， that the time might come， perhaps，when i should be running through the swamps again. iconcluded， in that chase， to be prepared for epps’ dogs，should they pursue me. he possessed several， one ofwhich was a notorious slave-hunter， and the most fierceand savage of his breed. while out hunting the coon orthe opossum， i never allowed an opportunity to escape，when alone， of whipping them severely. in this manner isucceeded at length in subduing them completely. theyfeared me， obeying my voice at once when others had    no control over them whatever. had they followed andovertaken me， i doubt not they would have shrank fromattacking me.
　　notwithstanding the certainty of being captured， thewoods and swamps are， nevertheless， continually filledwith runaways. many of them， when sick， or so worn outas to be unable to perform their tasks， escape into theswamps， willing to suffer the punishment inflicted forsuch offences， in order to obtain a day or two of rest.
　　while i belonged to ford， i was unwittingly the meansof disclosing the hiding-place of six or eight， who hadtaken up their residence in the “great pine woods.”
　　adam taydem frequently sent me from the mills overto the opening after provisions. the whole distance wasthen a thick pine forest. about ten o’clock of a beautifulmoonlight night， while walking along the texas road，returning to the mills， carrying a dressed pig in a bagswung over my shoulder， i heard footsteps behind me，and turning round， beheld two black men in the dress ofslaves approaching at a rapid pace. when within a shortdistance， one of them raised a club， as if intending tostrike me； the other snatched at the bag. i managed tododge them both， and seizing a pine knot， hurled it withsuch force against the head of one of them that he wasprostrated apparently senseless to the ground. just thentwo more made their appearance from one side of theroad. before they could grapple me， however， i succeededin passing them and taking to my heels， fled， much    affrighted， towards the mills. when adam was informedof the adventure， he hastened straightway to the indianvillage， and arousing cascalla and several of his tribe，started in pursuit of the highwaymen. i accompaniedthem to the scene of attack， when we discovered a puddleof blood in the road， where the man whom i had smittenwith the pine knot had fallen. after searching carefullythrough the woods a long time， one of cascalla’s mendiscovered a smoke curling up through the branches ofseveral prostrate pines， whose tops had fallen together.
　　the rendezvous was cautiously surrounded， and allof them taken prisoners. they had escaped from aplantation in the vicinity of lamourie， and had beensecreted there three weeks they had no evil designupon me， except to frighten me out of my pig. havingobserved me passing towards ford’s just at night-fall， andsuspecting the nature of my errand， they had followedme， seen me butcher and dress the porker， and start onmy return.
　　they had been pinched for food， and were driven tothis extremity by necessity. adam conveyed them to theparish jail， and was liberally rewarded.
　　not unfrequently the runaway loses his life in theattempt to escape. epps’ premises were bounded on oneside by carey’s， a very extensive sugar plantation. hecultivates annually at least fifteen hundred acres of cane，manufacturing twenty-two or twenty-three hundredhogsheads of sugar； an hogshead and a half being the usual yield of an acre. besides this he also cultivates fiveor six hundred acres of corn and cotton. he owned lastyear one hundred and fifty three field hands， besidesnearly as many children， and yearly hires a drove duringthe busy season from this side the mississippi.
　　one of his negro drivers， a pleasant， intelligentboy， was named augustus. during the holidays， andoccasionally while at work in adjoining fields， i hadan opportunity of making his acquaintance， whicheventually ripened into a warm and mutual attachment.
　　summer before last he was so unfortunate as to incur thedispleasure of the overseer， a coarse， heartless brute， whowhipped him most cruelly. augustus ran away. reachinga cane rick on hawkins’ plantation， he secreted himselfin the top of it. all carey’s dogs were put upon his track—some fifteen of them—and soon scented his footsteps tothe hiding place. they surrounded the rick， baying andscratching， but could not reach him. presently， guided bythe clamor of the hounds， the pursuers rode up， when theoverseer， mounting on to the rick， drew him forth. as herolled down to the ground the whole pack plunged uponhim， and before they could be beaten off， had gnawed andmutilated his body in the most shocking manner， theirteeth having penetrated to the bone in an hundred places.
　　he was taken up， tied upon a mule， and carried home.
　　but this was augustus’ last trouble. he lingered until thenext day， when death sought the unhappy boy， and kindlyrelieved him from his agony.
wwＷ、xiabook.com  www.7wenxue.com　  



第62章 Chapter XVII.(3)


　　it was not unusual for slave women as well as slavemen to endeavor to escape. nelly， eldret’s girl， withwhom i lumbered for a time in the “big cane brake，” layconcealed in epps’ corn crib three days. at night， whenhis family were asleep， she would steal into the quartersfor food， and return to the crib again. we concluded itwould no longer be safe for us to allow her to remain， andaccordingly she retraced her steps to her own cabin.
　　but the most remarkable instance of a successfulevasion of dogs and hunters was the following： amongcarey’s girls was one by the name of celeste. she wasnineteen or twenty， and far whiter than her owner， orany of his offspring. it required a close inspection todistinguish in her features the slightest trace of africanblood. a stranger would never have dreamed that she wasthe descendant of slaves. i was sitting in my cabin lateat night， playing a low air on my violin， when the dooropened carefully， and celeste stood before me. she waspale and haggard.
　　had an apparition arisen from the earth， i could nothave been more startled.
　　“who are you？” i demanded， after gazing at her amoment.
　　“i’m hungry； give me some bacon，” was her reply.
　　my first impression was that she was some derangedyoung mistress， who， escaping from home， waswandering， she knew not whither， and had been attractedto my cabin by the sound of the violin. the coarse cotton slave dress she wore， however， soon dispelled such asupposition.
　　“what is your name？” i again interrogated.
　　“my name is celeste，” she answered. “i belong tocarey， and have been two days among the palmettoes.
　　i am sick and can’t work， and would rather die in theswamp than be whipped to death by the overseer. carey’sdogs won’t follow me. they have tried to set them on.
　　there’s a secret between them and celeste， and they wontmind the devilish orders of the overseer. give me somemeat—i’m starving.”
　　i divided my scanty allowance with her， and whilepartaking of it， she related how she had managed to escapeand described the place of her concealment. in the edgeof the swamp， not half a mile from epps’ house， was as alarge space， thousands of acres in extent， thickly coveredwith palmetto. tall trees， whose long arms interlockedeach other， formed a canopy above them， so dense as toexclude the beams of the sun. it was like twilight always，even in the middle of the brightest day. in the centre ofthis great space， which nothing but serpents very oftenexplore—a sombre and solitary spot—celeste had erecteda rude hut of dead branches that had fallen to the ground，and covered it with the leaves of the palmetto. this wasthe abode she had selected. she had no fear of carey’sdogs， any more than i had of epps’. it is a fact， which ihave never been able to explain， that there are those whosetracks the hounds will absolutely refuse to follow. celestewas one of them.
　　for several nights she came to my cabin for food.
　　on one occasion our dogs barked as she approached，which aroused epps， and induced him to reconnoitre thepremises. he did not discover her， but after that it wasnot deemed prudent for her to come to the yard. whenall was silent i carried provisions to a certain spot agreedupon， where she would find them.
　　in this manner celeste passed the greater part of thesummer. she regained her health， and became strongand hearty. at all seasons of the year the howlings of wildanimals can be heard at night along the borders of theswamps. several times they had made her a midnightcall， awakening her from slumbers with a growl. terrifiedby such unpleasant salutations， she finally concluded toabandon her lonely dwelling； and， accordingly， returningto her master， was scourged， her neck meanwhile beingfastened in the stocks， and sent into the field again.




第63章 Chapter XVII.(4)


　　the year before my arrival in the country there wasa concerted movement among a number of slaves onbayou boeuf， that terminated tragically indeed. it was， ipresume， a matter of newspaper notoriety at the time， butall the knowledge i have of it， has been derived from therelation of those living at that period in the immediatevicinity of the excitement. it has become a subject ofgeneral and unfailing interest in every slave-hut onthe bayou， and will doubtless go down to succeedinggenerations as their chief tradition. lew cheney， withwhom i became acquainted—a shrewd， cunning negro，       more intelligent than the generality of his race， butunscrupulous and full of treachery—conceived the projectof organizing a company sufficiently strong to fight theirway against all opposition， to the neighboring territory ofmexico.
　　a remote spot， far within the depths of the swamp，back of hawkins’ plantation， was selected as the rallyingpoint. lew flitted from one plantation to another， in thedead of night， preaching a crusade to mexico， and， likepeter the hermit， creating a furor of excitement whereverhe appeared. at length a large number of runaways wereassembled； stolen mules， and corn gathered from thefields， and bacon filched from smoke-houses， had beenconveyed into the woods. the expedition was about readyto proceed， when their hiding place was discovered. lewcheney， becoming convinced of the ultimate failure ofhis project， in order to curry favor with his master， andavoid the consequences which he foresaw would follow，deliberately determined to sacrifice all his companions.
　　departing secretly from the encampment， he proclaimedamong the planters the number collected in the swamp，and， instead of stating truly the object they had inview， asserted their intention was to emerge from theirseclusion the first favorable opportunity， and murderevery white person along the bayou.
　　such an announcement， exaggerated as it passed frommouth to mouth， filled the whole country with terror. thefugitives were surrounded and taken prisoners， carried  in chains to alexandria， and hung by the populace.
　　not only those， but many who were suspected， thoughentirely innocent， were taken from the field and fromthe cabin， and without the shadow of process or formof trial， hurried to the scaffold. the planters on bayouboeuf finally rebelled against such reckless destruction ofproperty， but it was not until a regiment of soldiers hadarrived from some fort on the texan frontier， demolishedthe gallows， and opened the doors of the alexandriaprison， that the indiscriminate slaughter was stayed. lewcheney escaped， and was even rewarded for his treachery.
　　he is still living， but his name is despised and execratedby all his race throughout the parishes of rapides andavoyelles.
　　such an idea as insurrection， however， is not newamong the enslaved population of bayou boeuf. morethan once i have joined in serious consultation， when thesubject has been discussed， and there have been timeswhen a word from me would have placed hundreds ofmy fellow-bondsmen in an attitude of defiance. withoutarms or ammunition， or even with them， i saw such astep would result in certain defeat， disaster and death，and always raised my voice against it.
　　during the mexican war i well remember the
　　extravagant hopes that were excited. the news of victoryfilled the great house with rejoicing， but produced onlysorrow and disappointment in the cabin. in my opinion—and i have had opportunity to know something of the feeling of which i speak—there are not fifty slaves on theshores of bayou boeuf， but would hail with unmeasureddelight the approach of an invading army.
　　they are deceived who flatter themselves that theignorant and debased slave has no conception of themagnitude of his wrongs. they are deceived who imaginethat he arises from his knees， with back lacerated andbleeding， cherishing only a spirit of meekness andforgiveness. a day may come—it will come， if his prayeris heard—a terrible day of vengeance when the master inhis turn will cry in vain for mercy.




第64章 Chapter XVIII.(1)


　　wiley suffered severely at the hands of master epps，as has been related in the preceding chapter， but inthis respect he fared no worse than his unfortunatecompanions. “spare the rod，” was an idea scouted by ourmaster. he was constitutionally subject to periods of illhumor，and at such times， however little provocationthere might be， a certain amount of punishment wasinflicted. the circumstances attending the last floggingbut one that i received， will show how trivial a cause wassufficient with him for resorting to the whip.
　　a mr. o’niel， residing in the vicinity of the big pinewoods， called upon epps for the purpose of purchasingme. he was a tanner and currier by occupation，transacting an extensive business， and intended to placeme at service in some department of his establishment，provided he bought me. aunt phebe， while preparingthe dinner-table in the great house， overheard theirconversation. on returning to the yard at night， theold woman ran to meet me， designing， of course， tooverwhelm me with the news. she entered into a minuterepetition of all she had heard， and aunt phebe wasone whose ears never failed to drink in every word ofconversation uttered in her hearing. she enlarged upon the fact that “massa epps was g’wine to sell me to atanner ober in de pine woods，” so long and loudly asto attract the attention of the mistress， who， standingunobserved on the piazza at the time， was listening to ourconversation.
　　“well， aunt phebe，” said i， “i’m glad of it. i’m tiredof scraping cotton， and would rather be a tanner. i hopehe’ll buy me.”
　　o’niel did not effect a purchase， however， the partiesdiffering as to price， and the morning following hisarrival， departed homewards. he had been gone buta short time， when epps made his appearance in thefield. now nothing will more violently enrage a master，especially epps， than the intimation of one of hisservants that he would like to leave him. mistress eppshad repeated to him my expressions to aunt phebe theevening previous， as i learned from the latter afterwards，the mistress having mentioned to her that she hadoverheard us. on entering the field， epps walked directlyto me.
　　“so， platt， you’re tired of scraping cotton， are you？
　　you would like to change your master， eh？ you’re fond ofmoving round—traveler—ain’t ye？ ah， yes—like to travel foryour health， may be？ feel above cotton-scraping， i ’spose.
　　so you’re going into the tanning business？ good business—devilish fine business. enterprising nigger！ b’lieve i’ll gointo that business myself. down on your knees， and stripthat rag off your back！ i’ll try my hand at tanning.”
　　i begged earnestly， and endeavored to soften himwith excuses， but in vain. there was no other alternative；so kneeling down， i presented my bare back for theapplication of the lash.
　　“how do you like tanning？” he exclaimed， as therawhide descended upon my flesh. “how do you liketanning？” he repeated at every blow. in this mannerhe gave me twenty or thirty lashes， incessantly givingutterance to the word “tanning，” in one form ofexpression or another. when sufficiently “tanned，” heallowed me to arise， and with a half-malicious laughassured me， if i still fancied the business， he would giveme further instruction in it whenever i desired. thistime， he remarked， he had only given me a short lesson in“tanning” —the next time he would “curry me down.”
　　uncle abram， also， was frequently treated with greatbrutality， although he was one of the kindest and mostfaithful creatures in the world. he was my cabin-mate foryears. there was a benevolent expression in the old man’sface， pleasant to behold. he regarded us with a kind ofparental feeling， always counseling us with remarkablegravity and deliberation.
　　returning from marshall’s plantation one afternoon，whither i had been sent on some errand of the mistress， ifound him lying on the cabin floor， his clothes saturatedwith blood. he informed me that he had been stabbed！
　　while spreading cotton on the scaffold， epps came homeintoxicated from holmesville. he found fault with everything， giving many orders so directly contrary that itwas impossible to execute any of them. uncle abram，whose faculties were growing dull， became confused， andcommitted some blunder of no particular consequence.
　　epps was so enraged thereat， that， with drunkenrecklessness， he flew upon the old man， and stabbed himin the back. it was a long， ugly wound， but did not happento penetrate far enough to result fatally. it was sewedup by the mistress， who censured her husband withextreme severity， not only denouncing his inhumanity，but declaring that she expected nothing else than that hewould bring the family to poverty—that he would kill allthe slaves on the plantation in some of his drunken fits.
　　it was no uncommon thing with him to prostrate auntphebe with a chair or stick of wood； but the most cruelwhipping that ever i was doomed to witness—one i cannever recall with any other emotion than that of horror—was inflicted on the unfortunate patsey.
　　it has been seen that the jealousy and hatred ofmistress epps made the daily life of her young and agileslave completely miserable. i am happy in the beliefthat on numerous occasions i was the means of avertingpunishment from the inoffensive girl. in epps’ absencethe mistress often ordered me to whip her without theremotest provocation. i would refuse， saying that i fearedmy master’s displeasure， and several times venturedto remonstrate with her against the treatment patseyreceived. i endeavored to impress her with the truth  that the latter was not responsible for the acts of whichshe complained， but that she being a slave， and subjectentirely to her master’s will， he alone was answerable.
　　at length “the green-eyed monster” crept into thesoul of epps also， and then it was that he joined with hiswrathful wife in an infernal jubilee over the girl’s miseries.




第65章 Chapter XVIII.(2)


　　on a sabbath day in hoeing time， not long ago， wewere on the bayou bank， washing our clothes， as was ourusual custom. presently patsey was missing. epps calledaloud， but there was no answer. no one had observedher leaving the yard， and it was a wonder with us whithershe had gone. in the course of a couple of hours she wasseen approaching from the direction of shaw’s. this man，as has been intimated， was a notorious profligate， andwithal not on the most friendly terms with epps. harriet，his black wife， knowing patsey’s troubles， was kind toher， in consequence of which the latter was in the habitof going over to see her every opportunity. her visitswere prompted by friendship merely， but the suspiciongradually entered the brain of epps， that another anda baser passion led her thither—that it was not harrietshe desired to meet， but rather the unblushing libertine，his neighbor. patsey found her master in a fearful rageon her return. his violence so alarmed her that at firstshe attempted to evade direct answers to his questions，which only served to increase his suspicions. she finally，however， drew herself up proudly， and in a spirit ofindignation boldly denied his charges.
　　“missus don’t give me soap to wash with， as she doesthe rest，” said patsey， “and you know why. i went over toharriet’s to get a piece，” and saying this， she drew it forthfrom a pocket in her dress and exhibited it to him. “that’swhat i went to shaw’s for， massa epps，” continued she；“the lord knows that was all.”
　　“you lie， you black wench！” shouted epps.
　　“i don’t lie， massa. if you kill me， i’ll stick to that.”
　　“oh！ i’ll fetch you down. i’ll learn you to go to shaw’s.
　　i’ll take the starch out of ye，” he muttered fiercely throughhis shut teeth.
　　then turning to me， he ordered four stakes to bedriven into the ground， pointing with the toe of his bootto the places where he wanted them. when the stakeswere driven down， he ordered her to be stripped of everyarticle of dress. ropes were then brought， and the nakedgirl was laid upon her face， her wrists and feet each tiedfirmly to a stake. stepping to the piazza， he took down aheavy whip， and placing it in my hands， commanded meto lash her. unpleasant as it was， i was compelled to obeyhim. nowhere that day， on the face of the whole earth，i venture to say， was there such a demoniac exhibitionwitnessed as then ensued.
　　mistress epps stood on the piazza among her children，gazing on the scene with an air of heartless satisfaction.
　　the slaves were huddled together at a little distance，their countenances indicating the sorrow of their hearts.
　　poor patsey prayed piteously for mercy， but her prayers were vain. epps ground his teeth， and stamped uponthe ground， screaming at me， like a mad fiend， to strikeharder.
　　“strike harder， or your turn will come next， you scoundrel，”
　　he yelled.
　　“oh， mercy， massa！—oh！ have mercy， do. oh， god！ pityme，” patsey exclaimed continually， struggling fruitlessly，and the flesh quivering at every stroke.
　　when i had struck her as many as thirty times， istopped， and turned round toward epps， hoping he wassatisfied； but with bitter oaths and threats， he ordered meto continue. i inflicted ten or fifteen blows more. by thistime her back was covered with long welts， intersectingeach other like net work. epps was yet furious and savageas ever， demanding if she would like to go to shaw’s again，and swearing he would flog her until she wished shewas in h—l. throwing down the whip， i declared i couldpunish her no more. he ordered me to go on， threateningme with a severer flogging than she had received， in caseof refusal. my heart revolted at the inhuman scene， andrisking the consequences， i absolutely refused to raisethe whip. he then seized it himself， and applied it withten-fold greater force than i had. the painful cries andshrieks of the tortured patsey， mingling with the loudand angry curses of epps， loaded the air. she was terriblylacerated—i may say， without exaggeration， literallyflayed. the lash was wet with blood， which flowed downher sides and dropped upon the ground. at length she ceased struggling. her head sank listlessly on the ground.
　　her screams and supplications gradually decreased anddied away into a low moan. she no longer writhed andshrank beneath the lash when it bit out small pieces ofher flesh. i thought that she was dying！
　　it was the sabbath of the lord. the fields smiled inthe warm sunlight—the birds chirped merrily amidstthe foliage of the trees—peace and happiness seemed toreign everywhere， save in the bosoms of epps and hispanting victim and the silent witnesses around him. thetempestuous emotions that were raging there were littlein harmony with the calm and quiet beauty of the day. icould look on epps only with unutterable loathing andabhorrence， and thought within myself— “thou devil，sooner or later， somewhere in the course of eternaljustice， thou shalt answer for this sin！”
　　finally， he ceased whipping from mere exhaustion，and ordered phebe to bring a bucket of salt and water.
www.ｌzuoＷeＮ．ＣＯＭ



第66章 Chapter XVIII.(3)


　　after washing her thoroughly with this， i was told to takeher to her cabin. untying the ropes， i raised her in myarms. she was unable to stand， and as her head restedon my shoulder， she repeated many times， in a faintvoice scarcely perceptible， “oh， platt—oh， platt！” butnothing further. her dress was replaced， but it clung toher back， and was soon stiff with blood. we laid her onsome boards in the hut， where she remained a long time，with eyes closed and groaning in agony. at night phebeapplied melted tallow to her wounds， and so far as we were able， all endeavored to assist and console her. dayafter day she lay in her cabin upon her face， the sorespreventing her resting in any other position.
　　a blessed thing it would have been for her—days andweeks and months of misery it would have saved her—had she never lifted up her head in life again. indeed，from that time forward she was not what she had been.
　　the burden of a deep melancholy weighed heavily on herspirits. she no longer moved with that buoyant and elasticstep—there was not that mirthful sparkle in her eyes thatformerly distinguished her. the bounding vigor—thesprightly， laughter-loving spirit of her youth， were gone.
　　she fell into a mournful and desponding mood， and oftentimes would start up in her sleep， and with raised hands，plead for mercy. she became more silent than she was，toiling all day in our midst， not uttering a word. a careworn，pitiful expression settled on her face， and it was herhumor now to weep， rather than rejoice. if ever there wasa broken heart—one crushed and blighted by the rudegrasp of suffering misfortune—it was patsey’s.
　　she had been reared no better than her master’sbeast—looked upon merely as a valuable and handsomeanimal—and consequently possessed but a limitedamount of knowledge. and yet a faint light cast its raysover her intellect， so that it was not wholly dark. shehad a dim perception of god and of eternity， and a stillmore dim perception of a saviour who had died even forsuch as her. she entertained but confused notions of a future life—not comprehending the distinction betweenthe corporeal and spiritual existence. happiness， in hermind， was exemption from stripes—from labor—fromthe cruelty of masters and overseers. her idea of the joyof heaven was simply rest， and is fully expressed in theselines of a melancholy bard：
　　“i ask no paradise on high，
　　with cares on earth oppressed，
　　the only heaven for which i sigh，
　　is rest， eternal rest.”
　　it is a mistaken opinion that prevails in some quartersthat the slave does not understand the term—doesnot comprehend the idea of freedom. even on bayouboeuf， where i conceive slavery exists in its most abjectand cruel form—where it exhibits features altogetherunknown in more northern states—the most ignorantof them generally know full well its meaning. theyunderstand the privileges and exemptions that belong toit—that it would bestow upon them the fruits of their ownlabors， and that it would secure to them the enjoymentof domestic happiness. they do not fail to observe thedifference between their own condition and the meanestwhite man’s， and to realize the injustice of the laws whichplace it in his power not only to appropriate the profitsof their industry， but to subject them to unmerited andunprovoked punishment， without remedy， or the right toresist， or to remonstrate.
　　patsey’s life， especially after her whipping， was one longdream of liberty. far away， to her fancy an immeasurabledistance， she knew there was a land of freedom. athousand times she had heard that somewhere in thedistant north there were no slaves—no masters. in herimagination it was an enchanted region， the paradise ofthe earth. to dwell where the black man may work forhimself—live in his own cabin—till his own soil， was ablissful dream of patsey’s—a dream， alas！ the fulfillmentof which she can never realize.
　　the effect of these exhibitions of brutality on thehousehold of the slave-holder， is apparent. epps’ oldestson is an intelligent lad of ten or twelve years of age. it ispitiable， sometimes， to see him chastising， for instance，the venerable uncle abram. he will call the old man toaccount， and if in his childish judgement it is necessary，sentence him to a certain number of lashes， which heproceeds to inflict with much gravity and deliberation.
　　mounted on his pony， he often rides into the field withhis whip， playing the overseer， greatly to his father’sdelight. without discrimination， at such times， he appliesthe rawhide， urging the slaves forward with shouts， andoccasional expressions of profanity， while the old manlaughs， and commends him as a thorough-going boy.
　　“the child is father to the man，” and with such training，whatever may be his natural disposition， it cannot wellbe otherwise than that， on arriving at maturity， thesufferings and miseries of the slave will be looked upon with entire indifference. the influence of the iniquitoussystem necessarily fosters an unfeeling and cruel spirit，even in the bosoms of those who， among， their equals， areregarded as humane and generous.
　　young master epps possessed some noble qualities， yetno process of reasoning could lead him to comprehend，that in the eye of the almighty there is no distinction ofcolor. he looked upon the black man simply as an animal，differing in no respect from any other animal， save inthe gift of speech and the possession of somewhat higherinstincts， and， therefore， the more valuable. to worklike his father’s mules—to be whipped and kicked andscourged through life— to address the white man with hatin hand， and eyes bent servilely on the earth， in his mind，was the natural and proper destiny of the slave. broughtup with such ideas—in the notion that we stand withoutthe pale of humanity—no wonder the oppressors of mypeople are a pitiless and unrelenting race.
下+书+网



第67章 Chapter XIX.(1)


　　in the month of june， 1852， in pursuance of a previouscontract， mr. avery， a carpenter of bayou rouge，commenced the erection of a house for master epps. ithas previously been stated that there are no cellars onbayou boeuf； on the other hand， such is the low andswampy nature of the ground， the great houses areusually built upon spiles. another peculiarity is， therooms are not plastered， but the ceiling and sides arecovered with matched cypress boards， painted such coloras most pleases the owner’s taste. generally the plankand boards are sawed by slaves with whip-saws， therebeing no waterpower upon which mills might be builtwithin many miles. when the planter erects for himselfa dwelling， therefore， there is plenty of extra work for hisslaves. having had some experience under tibeats as acarpenter， i was taken from the field altogether， on thearrival of avery and his hands.
　　among them was one to whom i owe an immeasurabledebt of gratitude. only for him， in all probability i shouldhave ended my days in slavery. he was my deliverera man whose true heart overflowed with noble andgenerous emotions. to the last moment of my existencei shall remember him with feelings of thankfulness. his name was bass， and at that time he resided in marksville.
　　it will be difficult to convey a correct impression of hisappearance or character. he was a large man， betweenforty and fifty years old， of light complexion and lighthair. he was very cool and self-possessed， fond ofargument， but always speaking with extreme deliberation.
　　he was that kind of person whose peculiarity of mannerwas such that nothing he uttered ever gave offence. whatwould be intolerable， coming from the lips of another，could be said by him with impunity. there was not aman on red river， perhaps， that agreed with him on thesubject of politics or religion， and not a man， i ventureto say， who discussed either of those subjects half asmuch. it seemed to be taken for granted that he wouldespouse the unpopular side of every local question， andit always created amusement rather than displeasureamong his auditors， to listen to the ingenious and originalmanner in which he maintained the controversy. hewas a bachelor—an “old bachelor，” according to the trueacceptation of the term—having no kindred living， as heknew of， in the world. neither had he any permanentabiding place—wandering from one state to another，as his fancy dictated. he had lived in marksville threeor four years， and in the prosecution of his businessas a carpenter； and in consequence， likewise， of hispeculiarities， was quite extensively known throughoutthe parish of avoyelles. he was liberal to a fault； and hismany acts of kindness and transparent goodness of heart rendered him popular in the community， the sentimentof which he unceasingly combated.
　　he was a native of canada， from whence he hadwandered in early life， and after visiting all the principallocalities in the northern and western states， in the courseof his peregrinations， arrived in the unhealthy region ofthe red river. his last removal was from illinois. whitherhe has now gone， i regret to be obliged to say， is unknownto me. he gathered up his effects and departed quietlyfrom marksville the day before i did， the suspicions ofhis instrumentality in procuring my liberation renderingsuch a step necessary. for the commission of a just andrighteous act he would undoubtedly have suffered death，had he remained within reach of the slavewhipping tribeon bayou boeuf.
　　one day， while working on the new house， bass andepps became engaged in a controversy， to which， as willbe readily supposed， i listened with absorbing interest.
　　they were discussing the subject of slavery.
　　“i tell you what it is epps，” said bass， “it’s all wrong—allwrong， sir—there’s no justice nor righteousness in it. iwouldn’t own a slave if i was rich as croesus， which i am not，as is perfectly well understood， more particularly amongmy creditors. there’s another humbug—the credit system—humbug， sir； no credit—no debt. credit leads a man intotemptation. cash down is the only thing that will deliverhim from evil. but this question of slavery； what right haveyou to your niggers when you come down to the point？”
　　“what right！” said epps， laughing； “why， i bought ’em，and paid for ’em.”
　　“of course you did； the law says you have the right tohold a nigger， but begging the law’s pardon， it lies. yes，epps， when the law says that it’s a liar， and the truth isnot in it. is every thing right because the law allows it？
　　suppose they’d pass a law taking away your liberty andmaking you a slave？”
　　“oh， that ain’t a supposable case，” said epps， stilllaughing； “hope you don’t compare me to a nigger， bass.”
　　“well，” bass answered gravely， “no， not exactly. but ihave seen niggers before now as good as i am， and i haveno acquaintance with any white man in these parts thati consider a whit better than myself. now， in the sight ofgod， what is the difference， epps， between a white manand a black one？”
　　“all the difference in the world，” replied epps. “youmight as well ask what the difference is between a whiteman and a baboon. now， i’ve seen one of them crittersin orleans that knowed just as much as any nigger i’vegot. you’d call them feller citizens， i s’pose？”—and eppsindulged in a loud laugh at his own wit.
　　“look here， epps，” continued his companion； “youcan’t laugh me down in that way. some men are witty，and some ain’t so witty as they think they are. now let meask you a question. are all men created free and equal asthe declaration of independence holds they are？”
　　“yes，” responded epps， “but all men， niggers， and  monkeys ain’t；” and hereupon he broke forth into a moreboisterous laugh than before.
www.xiaosgyitxt.com



第68章 Chapter XIX.(2)


　　“there are monkeys among white people as well asblack， when you come to that，” coolly remarked bass. “iknow some white men that use arguments no sensiblemonkey would. but let that pass. these niggers arehuman beings. if they don’t know as much as theirmasters， whose fault is it？ they are not allowed toknow anything. you have books and papers， and can gowhere you please， and gather intelligence in a thousandways. but your slaves have no privileges. you’d whipone of them if caught reading a book. they are held inbondage， generation after generation， deprived of mentalimprovement， and who can expect them to possessmuch knowledge？ if they are not brought down to a levelwith the brute creation， you slaveholders will never beblamed for it. if they are baboons， or stand no higher inthe scale of intelligence than such animals， you and menlike you will have to answer for it. there’s a sin， a fearfulsin， resting on this nation， that will not go unpunishedforever. there will be a reckoning yet—yes， epps， there’sa day coming that will burn as an oven. it may be sooneror it may be later， but it’s a coming as sure as the lord isjust.”
　　“if you lived up among the yankees in new-england，”
　　said epps， “i expect you’d be one of them cursed fanaticsthat know more than the constitution， and go aboutpeddling clocks and coaxing niggers to run away.”
　　“if i was in new-england，” returned bass， “i wouldbe just what i am here. i would say that slavery was aniniquity， and ought to be abolished. i would say therewas no reason nor justice in the law， or the constitutionthat allows one man to hold another man in bondage. itwould be hard for you to lose your property， to be sure，but it wouldn’t be half as hard as it would be to lose yourliberty. you have no more right to your freedom， in exactjustice， than uncle abram yonder. talk about black skin，and black blood； why， how many slaves are there on thisbayou as white as either of us？ and what difference isthere in the color of the soul？ pshaw！ the whole systemis as absurd as it is cruel. you may own niggers andbehanged， but i wouldn’t own one for the best plantationin louisiana.”
　　“you like to hear yourself talk， bass， better than anyman i know of. you would argue that black was white， orwhite black， if any body would contradict you. nothingsuits you in this world， and i don’t believe you will besatisfied with the next， if you should have your choice inthem.”
　　conversations substantially like the foregoing werenot unusual between the two after this； epps drawinghim out more for the purpose of creating a laugh at hisexpense， than with a view of fairly discussing the meritsof the question. he looked upon bass， as a man ready tosay anything merely for the pleasure of hearing his ownvoice； as somewhat self-conceited， perhaps， contending against his faith and judgment， in order， simply， toexhibit his dexterity in argumentation.
　　he remained at epps’ through the summer， visitingmarksville generally once a fortnight. the more i sawof him， the more i became convinced he was a man inwhom i could confide. nevertheless， my previous illfortunehad taught me to be extremely cautious. it wasnot my place to speak to a white man except when spokento， but i omitted no opportunity of throwing myself in hisway， and endeavored constantly in every possible mannerto attract his attention. in the early part of august heand myself were at work alone in the house， the othercarpenters having left， and epps being absent in the field.
　　now was the time， if ever， to broach the subject， and iresolved to do it， and submit to whatever consequencesmight ensue. we were busily at work in the afternoon，when i stopped suddenly and said—
　　“master bass， i want to ask you what part of thecountry you came from？”
　　“why， platt， what put that into your head？” he answered.
　　“you wouldn’t know if i should tell you.” after a momentor two he added— “i was born in canada； now guesswhere that is.”
　　“oh， i know where canada is，” said i， “i have beenthere myself.”
　　“yes， i expect you are well acquainted all through thatcountry”， he remarked， laughing incredulously.
　　“as sure as i live， master bass，” i replied， “i have been there. i have been in montreal and kingston， andqueenston， and a great many places in canada， and ihave been in york state， too—in buffalo， and rochester，and albany， and can tell you the names of the villages onthe erie canal and the champlain canal.”
　　bass turned round and gazed at me a long timewithout uttering a syllable.
　　“how came you here？” he inquired， at length， “masterbass，” i answered， “if justice had been done， i neverwould have been here.”
　　“well， how’s this？” said he. “who are you？ you havebeen in canada sure enough； i know all the places youmention. how did you happen to get here？ come， tell meall about it.”
　　“i have no friends here，” was my reply， “that i canput confidence in. i am afraid to tell you， though i don’tbelieve you would tell master epps if i should.”
　　he assured me earnestly he would keep every word imight speak to him a profound secret， and his curiositywas evidently strongly excited. it was a long story， iinformed him， and would take some time to relate it.
　　master epps would be back soon， but if he would see methat night after all were asleep， i would repeat it to him. heconsented readily to the arrangement， and directed me tocome into the building where we were then at work， and iwould find him there. about midnight， when all was stilland quiet， i crept cautiously from my cabin， and silentlyentering the unfinished building， found him awaiting me.
　　after further assurances on his part that i shouldnot be betrayed， i began a relation of the history of mylife and misfortunes. he was deeply interested askingnumerous questions in reference to localities and events.
www．Ｌｚｕｏｗｅｎ．ｃｏｍ



第69章 Chapter XIX.(3)


　　having ended my story i besought him to write to someof my friends at the north， acquainting them with mysituation， and begging them to forward free papers， ortake such steps as they might consider proper to securemy release. he promised to do so， but dwelt upon thedanger of such an act in case of detection， and nowimpressed upon me the great necessity of strict silenceand secresy. before we parted our plan of operation wasarranged.
　　we agreed to meet the next night at a specified placeamong the high weeds on the bank of the bayou， somedistance from master’s dwelling. there he was to writedown on paper the names and address of several persons，old friends in the north， to whom he would direct lettersduring his next visit to marksville. it was not deemedprudent to meet in the new house， inasmuch as thelight it would be necessary to use might possibly bediscovered. in the course of the day i managed to obtain afew matches and a piece of candle， unperceived， from thekitchen， during a temporary absence of aunt phebe. basshad pencil and paper in his tool chest.
　　at the appointed hour we met on the bayou bank， andcreeping among the high weeds， i lighted the candle，while he drew forth pencil and paper and prepared for business. i gave him the names of william perry， cephasparker and judge marvin， all of saratoga springs，saratoga county， new-york. i had been employed bythe latter in the united states hotel， and had transactedbusiness with the former to a considerable extent， andtrusted that at least one of them would be still livingat that place. he carefully wrote the names， and thenremarked， thoughtfully—
　　“it is so many years since you left saratoga， all thesemen may be dead， or may have removed. you say youobtained papers at the custom house in new-york.
　　probably there is a record of them there， and i think itwould be well to write and ascertain.”
　　i agreed with him， and again repeated the circumstancesrelated heretofore， connected with my visit to the customhouse with brown and hamilton. we lingered on thebank of the bayou an hour or more， conversing uponthe subject which now engrossed our thoughts. i couldno longer doubt his fidelity， and freely spoke to him ofthe many sorrows i had borne in silence， and so long. ispoke of my wife and children， mentioning their namesand ages， and dwelling upon the unspeakable happinessit would be to clasp them to my heart once more beforei died. i caught him by the hand， and with tears andpassionate entreaties implored him to befriend me—torestore me to my kindred and to liberty—promisingi would weary heaven the remainder of my life withprayers that it would bless and prosper him. in the enjoyment of freedom—surrounded by the associationsof youth， and restored to the bosom of my family—thatpromise is not yet forgotten， nor shall it ever be so long asi have strength to raise my imploring eyes on high.
　　“oh， blessings on his kindly voice and on his silver hair，and blessings on his whole life long， until he meet me there.”
　　he overwhelmed me with assurances of friendship andfaithfulness， saying he had never before taken so deepan interest in the fate of any one. he spoke of himself ina somewhat mournful tone， as a lonely man， a wandererabout the world—that he was growing old， and mustsoon reach the end of his earthly journey， and lie down tohis final rest without kith or kin to mourn for him， or toremember him—that his life was of little value to himself，and henceforth should be devoted to the accomplishmentof my liberty， and to an unceasing warfare against theaccursed shame of slavery.
　　after this time we seldom spoke to， or recognized eachother. he was， moreover， less free in his conversationwith epps on the subject of slavery. the remotestsuspicion that there was any unusual intimacy —anysecret understanding between us—never once entered themind of epps， or any other person， white or black， on theplantation.
　　i am often asked， with an air of incredulity， how isucceeded so many years in keeping from my daily andconstant companions the knowledge of my true name and history. the terrible lesson burch taught me， impressedindelibly upon my mind the danger and uselessness ofasserting i was a freeman. there， was no possibility ofany slave being able to assist me， while， on the otherhand， there was a possibility of his exposing me. when itis recollected the whole current of my thoughts， for twelveyears， turned to the contemplation of escape， it will not bewondered at， that i was always cautious and on my guard.
　　it would have been an act of folly to have proclaimedmy right to freedom； it would only have subjected me toseverer scrutiny—probably have consigned me to somemore distant and inaccessible region than even bayouboeuf. edwin epps was a person utterly regardless of ablack man’s rights or wrongs—utterly destitute of anynatural sense of justice， as i well knew. it was important，therefore， not only as， regarded my hope of deliverance，but also as regarded the few personal priviliges i was aspermitted to enjoy， to keep from him the history of mylife.
www.xiaosgyitxt.comwww.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ



第70章 Chapter XIX.(4)


　　the saturday night subsequent to our interview atthe water’s edge， bass went home to marksville. thenext day， being sunday， he employed himself in his ownroom writing letters. one he directed to the collectorof customs at new-york， another to judge marvin， andanother to messrs. parker and perry jointly. the latterwas the one which led to my recovery. he subscribed mytrue name， but in the post intimated i was not thewriter. the letter itself shows that he considered himself252
　　engaged in a dangerous undertaking—no less thanrunning “the risk of his life， if detected.” i did not seethe letter before it was mailed， but have since obtained acopy， which is here inserted：
　　“bayou boeuf， august 15， 1852.
　　“mr. william perry or mr. cephas parker：
　　“gentlemen—it having been a long time since i have seen orheard from you， and not knowing that you are living， it is withuncertainty that i write to you， but the necessity of the casemust be my excuse.
　　“having been born free， just across the river from you， i amcertain you must know me， and i am here now a slave. i wishyou to obtain free papers for me， and forward them to me atmarksville， louisiana， parish of avoyelles， and oblige“yours， solomon northup.
　　“the way i came to be a slave， i was taken sick in washingtoncity， and was insensible for some time. when i recovered myreason， i was robbed of my free-papers， and in irons on myway to this state， and have never been able to get any one towrite for me until now； and he that is writing for me runs therisk of his life if detected.”
　　the allusion to myself in the work recently issued，entitled “a key to uncle tom’s cabin，” contains the firstpart of this letter， omitting the post. neither arethe full names of the gentlemen to whom it is directedcorrectly stated， there being a slight discrepancy，probably a typographical error. to the post morethan to the body of the communication am i indebted formy liberation， as will presently be seen.
　　when bass returned from marksville he informedme of what he had done. we continued our midnightconsultations， never speaking to each other throughthe day， excepting as it was necessary about the work.
　　as nearly as he was able to ascertain， it would requiretwo weeks for the letter to reach saratoga in due courseof mail， and the same length of time for an answer toreturn. within six weeks， at the farthest， we concluded，an answer would arrive， if it arrived at all. a greatmany suggestions were now made， and a great deal ofconversation took place between us， as to the most safeand proper course to pursue on receipt of the free papers.
　　they would stand between him and harm， in case we wereovertaken and arrested leaving the country altogether. itwould be no infringement of law， however much it mightprovoke individual hostility， to assist a freeman to regainhis freedom.
　　at the end of four weeks he was again at marksville，but no answer had arrived. i was sorely disappointed， butstill reconciled myself with the reflection that sufficientlength of time had not yet elapsed— that there mighthave been delays—and that i could not reasonably expectone so soon. six， seven， eight， and ten weeks passed by，however， and nothing came. i was in a fever of suspensewhenever bass visited marksville， and could scarcelyclose my eyes until his return. finally my master’s housewas finished， and the time came when bass must leaveme. the night before his departure i was wholly given up to despair. i had clung to him as a drowning manclings to the floating spar， knowing if it ships from hisgrasp he must forever sink beneath the waves. the allglorioushope， upon which i had laid such eager hold，
　　was crumbling to ashes in my hands. i felt as if sinkingdown， down， amidst the bitter waters of slavery， fromthe unfathomable depths of which i should never riseagain.
　　the generous heart of my friend and benefactorwas touched with pity at the sight of my distress. heendeavored to cheer me up， promising to return the daybefore christmas， and if no intelligence was received inthe meantime， some further step would be undertaken toeffect our design. he exhorted me to keep up my spirits—to rely upon his continued efforts in my behalf， assuringme， in most earnest and impressive language， that myliberation should， from thenceforth， be the chief object ofhis thoughts.
　　in his absence the time passed slowly indeed. ilooked forward to christmas with intense anxiety andimpatience. i had about given up the expectation ofreceiving any answer to the letters. they might havemiscarried， or might have been misdirected. perhapsthose at saratoga， to whom they had been addressed，were all dead； perhaps， engaged in their pursuits they didnot consider the fate of an obscure， unhappy black manof sufficient importance to be noticed. my whole reliancewas in bass. the faith i had in him was continually re255assuring me， and enabled me to stand up against the tideof disappointment that had overwhelmed me.
　　so wholly was i absorbed in reflecting upon mysituation and prospects， that the hands with whom ilabored in the field often observed it. patsey would askme if i was sick， and uncle abram， and bob， and wileyfrequently expressed a curiosity to know what i could bethinking about so steadily. but i evaded their inquirieswith some light remark， and kept my thoughts lockedclosely in my breast.
  



第71章 Chapter XX.(1)


　　faithful to his word， the day before christmas， just atnight-fall， bass came riding into the yard.
　　“how are you，” said epps， shaking him by the hand，“glad to see you.”
　　he would not have been very glad had he known theobject of his errand.
　　“quite well， quite well，” answered bass. “had somebusiness out on the bayou， and concluded to call and seeyou， and stay over night.”
　　epps ordered one of the slaves to take charge of hishorse， and with much talk and laughter they passed intothe house together； not， however， until bass had lookedat me significantly， as much as to say，
　　“keep dark， we understand each other.” it wasten o’clock at night before the labors of the day wereperformed， when i entered the cabin. at that time uncleabram and bob occupied it with me. i laid down upon myboard and feigned i was asleep. when my companionshad fallen into a profound slumber， i moved stealthilyout of the door， and watched， and listened attentively forsome sign or sound from bass. there i stood until longafter midnight， but nothing could be seen or heard. asi suspected， he dared not leave the house， through fear of exciting the suspicion of some of the family. i judged，correctly， he would rise earlier than was his custom， andtake the opportunity of seeing me before epps was up.
　　accordingly i aroused uncle abram an hour sooner thanusual， and sent him into the house to build a fire， which，at that season of the year， is a part of uncle abram’sduties.
　　i also gave bob a violent shake， and asked him if heintended to sleep till noon， saying master would beup before the mules were fed. he knew right well theconsequence that would follow such an event， and，jumping to his feet， was at the horse-pasture in a twinkling.
　　presently， when both were gone， bass slipped into thecabin.
　　“no letter yet， platt，” said he. the announcement fellupon my heart like lead.
　　“oh， do write again， master bass，” i cried； “i will giveyou the names of a great many i know. surely they arenot all dead. surely some one will pity me.”
　　“no use，” bass replied， “no use. i have made up mymind to that. i fear the marksville post-master willmistrust something， i have inquired so often at his office.
　　too uncertain—too dangerous.”
　　“then it is all over，” i exclaimed. “oh， my god， howcan i end my days here！”
　　“you’re not going to end them here，” he said， “unlessyou die very soon. i’ve thought this matter all have cometo a determination. there are more ways than one to manage this business， and a better and surer way thanwriting letters. i have a job or two on hand which can becompleted by march or april. by that time i shall have aconsiderable sum of money， and then， platt， i am going tosaratoga myself.”
　　i could scarcely credit my own senses as the words fellfrom his lips. but he assured me， in a manner that left nodoubt of the sincerity of his intention， that if his life wasspared until spring， he should certainly undertake thejourney.
　　“i have lived in this region long enough，” he considered；“i may as well be in one place as another. for a long timei have been thinking of going back more to the placewhere i was born. i’m tired of slavery as well as you. ifi can succeed in getting you away from here， it will be agood act that i shall like to think of all my life. and i shallsucceed， platt； i’m bound to do it. now let me tell youwhat i want. epps will be up soon， and it won’t do to becaught here. think of a great many men at saratoga andsandy hill， and in that neighborhood， who once knewyou. i shall make excuse to come here again in the courseof the winter， when i will write down their names. i willthen know who to call on when i go north. think of allyou can. cheer up！ don’t be discouraged. i’m with you，life or death. good-bye. god bless you，” and saying thishe left the cabin quickly， and entered the great house.
　　it was christmas morning—the happiest day in thewhole year for the slave. that morning he need not hurryto the field， with his gourd and cotton-bag. happinesssparkled in the eyes and overspread the countenances ofall. the time of feasting and dancing had come. the caneand cotton fields were deserted. that day the clean dresswas to. be donned—the red ribbon displayed； there wereto be re-unions， and joy and laughter， and hurrying toand fro. it was to be a day of liberty among the children ofslavery. wherefore they were happy， and rejoiced.
　　after breakfast epps and bass sauntered about theyard， conversing upon the price of cotton， and variousother topics.
　　“where do your niggers hold christmas？” bass inquired.
　　“platt is going to tanners to-day. his fiddle is in greatdemand. they want him at marshall’s monday， and missmary mccoy， on the old norwood plantation， writes me anote that she wants him to play for her niggers tuesday.”
　　“he is rather a smart boy， ain’t he？” said bass. “comehere， platt，” he added， looking at me as i walked upto them， as if he had never thought before to take anyspecial notice of me.
　　“yes，” replied epps， taking hold of my arm and feelingit， “there isn’t a bad joint in him. there ain’t a boy on thebayou worth more than he is—perfectly sound， and nobad tricks. d—n him， he isn’t like other niggers； doesn’tlook like ’em—don’t act like ’em. i was offered seventeenhundred dollars for him last week.”
　　“and didn’t take it？” bass inquired， with an air ofsurprise.
　　“take it—no； devilish clear of it. why， he’s a reg’lar genius；can make a plough beam， wagon tongue—anything， aswell as you can. marshall wanted to put up one of hisniggers agin him and raffle for them， but i told him iwould see the devil have him first.”
　　“i don’t see anything remarkable about him，” bassobserved.
　　“why， just feel of him， now，” epps rejoined. “you don’tsee a boy very often put together any closer than he is.
　　he’s a thin-skin’d cuss， and won’t bear as much whippingas some； but he’s got the muscle in him， and no mistake.




第72章 Chapter XX.(2)


　　bass felt of me， turned me round， and made a  thorough examination， epps all the while dwelling onmy good points. but his visitor seemed to take but littleinterest finally in the subject， and consequently it wasdropped. bass soon departed， giving me another sly lookof recognition and significance， as he trotted out of theyard.
　　when he was gone i obtained a pass， and started fortanner’s—not peter tanner’s， of whom mention haspreviously been made， but a relative of his. i playedduring the day and most of the night， spending the nextday， sunday， in my cabin. monday i crossed the bayou todouglas marshall’s， all epps’ slaves accompanying me，and on tuesday went to the old norwood place， which isthe third plantation above marshall’s， on the same side ofthe water.
　　this estate is now owned by miss mary mccoy， a lovely girl， some twenty years of age. she is the beautyand the glory of bayou boeef. she owns about a hundredworking hands， besides a great many house servants，yard boys， and young children. her brother-in-law， whoresides on the adjoining estate， is her general agent. sheis beloved by all her slaves， and good reason indeed havethey to be thankful that they have fallen into such gentlehands. nowhere on the bayou are there such feasts， suchmerrymaking， as at young madam mccoy’s. thither，more than to any other place， do the old and the young formiles around love to repair in the time of the christmasholiday； for nowhere else can they find such deliciousrepasts； nowhere else can they hear a voice speaking tothem so pleasantly. no one is so well beloved—no onefills so large a space in the hearts of a thousand slaves，as young madam mccoy， the orphan mistress of the oldnorwood estate.
　　on my arrival at her place， i found two or threehundred had assembled. the table was prepared in along building， which she had erected expressly for herslaves to dance in. it was covered with every varietyof food the country afforded， and was pronounced bygeneral acclamation to be the rarest of dinners. roastturkey， pig， chicken， duck， and all kinds of meat， baked，boiled， and broiled， formed a line the whole length of theextended table， while the vacant spaces were filled withtarts， jellies， and frosted cake， and pastry of many kinds.
　　the young mistress walked around the table， smiling and saying a kind word to each one， and seemed to enjoy thescene exceedingly.
　　when the dinner was over the tables were removed tomake room for the dancers. i tuned my violin and struckup a lively air； while some joined in a nimble reel， otherspatted and sang their simple but melodious songs， fillingthe great room with music mingled with the sound ofhuman voices and the clatter of many feet.
　　in the evening the mistress returned， and stood in thedoor a long time， looking at us. she was magnificentlyarrayed. her dark hair and eyes contrasted strongly withher clear and delicate complexion. her form was slenderbut commanding， and her movement was a combinationof unaffected dignity and grace. as she stood there， cladin her rich apparel， her face animated with pleasure， ithought i had never looked upon a human being half sobeautiful. i dwell with delight upon the deion of thisfair and gentle lady， not only because she inspired mewith emotions of gratitude and admiration， but becausei would have the reader understand that all slaveownerson bayou boeuf are not like epps， or tibeats， orjim burns. occasionally can be found， rarely it may be，indeed， a good man like william ford， or an angel ofkindness like young mistress mccoy.
下 & 书 & 网



第73章 Chapter XX.(3)


　　tuesday concluded the three holidays epps yearlyallowed us. on my way home， wednesday morning，while passing the plantation of william pierce， thatgentleman hailed me， saying he had received a line from263
　　epps， brought down by william varnell， permitting himto detain me for the purpose of playing for his slavesthat night. it was the last time i was destined to witnessa slave dance on the shores of bayou boeuf. the party atpierce’s continued their jollification until broad daylight，when i returned to my master’s house， somewhat weariedwith the loss of rest， but rejoicing in the possession ofnumerous bits and picayunes， which the whites， who werepleased with my musical performances， had contributed.
　　on saturday morning， for the first time in years， ioverslept myself. i was frightened on coming out of thecabin to find the slaves were already in the field. they hadpreceded me some fifteen minutes. leaving my dinnerand water-gourd， i hurried after them as fast as i couldmove. it was not yet sunrise， but epps was on the piazzaas i left the hut， and cried out to me that it was a prettytime of day to be getting up. by extra exertion my rowwas up when he came out after breakfast. this， however，was no excuse for the offence of oversleeping. bidding mestrip and lie down， he gave me ten or fifteen lashes， at theconclusion of which he inquired if i thought， after that， icould get up sometime in the morning. i expressed myselfquite positively that i could， and， with back stinging withpain， went about my work.
　　the following day， sunday， my thoughts were uponbass， and the probabilities and hopes which hungupon his action and determination. i considered theuncertainty of life； that if it should be the will of godthat he should die， my prospect of deliverance， and allexpectation of happiness in this world， would be whollyended and destroyed. my sore back， perhaps， did nothave a tendency to render me unusually cheerful. i feltdown-hearted and unhappy all day long， and when ilaid down upon the hard board at night， my heart wasoppressed with such a load of grief； it seemed that it mustbreak.
　　monday morning， the third of january， 1853， we werein the field betimes. it was a raw， cold morning， such asis unusual in that region. i was in advance， uncle abramnext to me， behind him bob， patsey and wiley， with ourcotton-bags about our necks. epps happened （a rarething， indeed，） to come out that morning without hiswhip. he swore， in a manner that would shame a pirate，that we were doing nothing. bob ventured to say thathis fingers were so numb with cold he couldn’t pick fast.
　　epps cursed himself for not having brought his rawhide，and declared that when he came out again he wouldwarm us well； yes， he would make us all hotter than thatfiery realm in which i am sometimes compelled to believehe will himself eventually reside.
　　with these fervent expressions， he left us. whenout of hearing， we commenced talking to each other，saying how hard it was to be compelled to keep up ourtasks with numb fingers； how unreasonable master was，and speaking of him generally in no flattering terms.
　　our conversation was interrupted by a carriage passing rapidly towards the house. looking up， we saw two menapproaching us through the cotton-field.
　　having now brought down this narrative to the lasthour i was to spend on bayou boeuf—having gottenthrough my last cotton picking， and about to bid masterepps farewell—i must beg the reader to go back with meto the month of august； to follow bass’ letter on its longjourney to saratoga； to learn the effect it produced—andthat， while i was repining and despairing in the slave hutof edwin epps， through the friendship of bass and thegoodness of providence， all things were working togetherfor my deliverance.
www.xiaosgyitxt.com



第74章 Chapter XXI.(1)


　　i am indebted to mr. henry b. northup and others formany of the particulars contained in this chapter.
　　the letter written-by bass， directed to parker andperry， and which was deposited in the post-office inmarksville on the 15th day of august， 1852， arrived atsaratoga in the early part of september. some timeprevious to this， anne had removed to glens falls，warren county， where she had charge of the kitchen incarpenter’s hotel. she kept house， however， lodging withour children， and was only absent from them during suchtime as the discharge of her duties in the hotel required.
　　messrs. parker and perry， on receipt of the letter，forwarded it immediately to anne. on reading it thechildren were all excitement， and without delay hastenedto the neighboring village of sandy hill， to consult henryb. northup， and obtain his advice and assistance in thematter.
　　upon examination， that gentleman found among thestatutes of the state an act providing for the recovery offree citizens from slavery. it was passed may 14， 1840，and is entitled “an act more effectually to protect the freecitizens of this state from being kidnapped or reducedto slavery.” it provides that it shall be the duty of the governor， upon the receipt of satisfactory informationthat any free citizen or inhabitant of this state， iswrongfully held in another state or territory of theunited states， upon the allegation or pretence that suchperson is a slave， or by color of any usage or rule of lawis deemed or taken to be a slave， to take such measuresto procure the restoration of such person to liberty， as heshall deem necessary. and to that end， he is authorized toappoint and employ an agent， and directed to furnish himwith such credentials and instructions as will be likelyto accomplish the object of his appointment. it requiresthe agent so appointed to proceed to collect the properproof to establish the right of such person to his freedom；to perform such journeys， take such measures， institutesuch legal proceedings， &c.， as may be necessary toreturn such person to this state， and charges all expensesincurred in carrying the act into effect， upon moneys nototherwise appropriated in the treasury.a
　　it was necessary to establish two facts to the satisfactionof the governor： first， that i was a free citizen of new-york； and secondly， that i was wrongfully held inbondage. as to the first point， there was no difficulty， allthe older inhabitants in the vicinity being ready to testifyto it. the second point rested entirely upon the letterto parker and perry， written in an unknown hand， andupon the letter penned on board the brig orleans， which，unfortunately， had been mislaid or lost.
　　a see appendix a.
　　a memorial was prepared， directed to his excellency，governor hunt， setting forth her marriage， my departureto washington city； the receipt of the letters； that iwas a free citizen， and such other facts as were deemedimportant， and was signed and verified by anne.
　　accompanying this memorial were several affidavitsof prominent citizens of sandy hill and fort edward，corroborating fully the statements it contained， and also arequest of several well known gentlemen to the governor，that henry b. northup be appointed agent under thelegislative act.
　　on reading the memorial and affidavits， his excellencytook a lively interest in the matter， and on the 23d day ofnovember， 1852， under the seal of the state， “constituted，appointed and employed henry b. northup， esq.， anagent， with full power to effect” my restoration， and totake such measures as would be most likely to accomplishit， and instructing him to proceed to louisiana with allconvenient dispatch.a
　　the pressing nature of mr. northup’s professionaland political engagements delayed his departure untildecember. on the fourteenth day of that month he leftsandy hill， and proceeded to washington. the hon.
　　pierre soule， senator in congress from louisiana， hon.
　　mr. conrad， secretary of war， and judge nelson， of thesupreme court of the united states， upon hearing aa see appendix b.
　　statement of the facts， and examining his commission， andcertified copies of the memorial and affidavits， furnishedhim with open letters to gentlemen in louisiana， stronglyurging their assistance in accomplishing the object of hisappointment.
　　senator soule especially interested himself in thematter， insisting， in forcible language， that it was theduty and interest of every planter in his state to aid inrestoring me to freedom， and trusted the sentiments ofhonor and justice in the bosom of every citizen of thecommonwealth would enlist him at once in my behalf.
　　having obtained these valuable letters， mr. northupreturned to baltimore， and proceeded from thence topittsburgh. it was his original intention， under adviceof friends at washington， to go directly to new orleans，and consult the authorities of that city. providentially，however， on arriving at the mouth of red river， hechanged his mind. had he continued on， he would nothave met with bass， in which case the search for mewould probably have been fruitless.
　　taking passage on the first steamer that arrived， hepursued his journey up red river， a sluggish， windingstream， flowing through a vast region of primitive forestsand impenetrable swamps， almost wholly destitute ofinhabitants. about nine o’clock in the forenoon， january1st， 1853， he left the steamboat at marksville， andproceeded directly to marksville court house， a smallvillage four miles in the interior.
　　from the fact that the letter to messrs. parker andperry was post-marked at marksville， it was supposed byhim that i was in that place or its immediate vicinity. onreaching this town， he at once laid his business before thehon. john p. waddill， a legal gentleman of distinction，and a man of fine genius and most noble impulses.
   



第75章 Chapter XXI.(2)


　　after reading the letters and documents presented him，and listening to a representation of the circumstancesunder which i had been carried away into captivity， mr.
　　waddill at once proffered his services， and entered intothe affair with great zeal and earnestness. he， in commonwith others of like elevated character， looked uponthe kidnapped with abhorrence. the title of his fellowparishioners and clients to the property which constitutedthe larger proportion of their wealth， not only dependedupon the good faith in which slave sales were transacted，but he was a man in whose honorable heart emotions ofindignation were aroused by such an instance of injustice.
　　marksville， although occupying a prominent position，and standing out in impressive italics on the map oflouisiana， is， in fact， but a small and insignificant hamlet.
　　aside from the tavern， kept by a jolly and generousboniface， the court house， inhabited by lawless cows andswine in the seasons of vacation， and a high gallows， withits dissevered rope dangling in the air， there is little toattract the attention of the stranger.
　　solomon northup was a name mr. waddill had neverheard， but he was confident that if there was a slavebearing that appellation in marksville or vicinity， hisblack boy tom would know him. tom was accordinglycalled， but in all his extensive circle of acquaintancesthere was no such personage.
　　the letter to parker and perry was dated at bayouboeuf. at this place， therefore， the conclusion was， imust be sought. but here a difficulty suggested itself， ofa very grave character indeed. bayou boeuf， at its nearestpoint， was twenty-three miles distant， and was the nameapplied to the section of country extending betweenfifty and a hundred miles， on both sides of that stream.
　　thousands and thousands of slaves resided upon itsshores， the remarkable richness and fertility of the soilhaving attracted thither a great number of planters. theinformation in the letter was so vague and indefinite asto render it difficult to conclude upon any specific courseof proceeding. it was finally determined， however， asthe only plan that presented any prospect of success，that northup and the brother of waddill， a student inthe office of the latter， should repair to the bayou， andtraveling up one side and down the other its whole length，inquire at each plantation for me. mr. waddill tenderedthe use of his carriage， and it was definitely arrangedthat they should start upon the excursion early mondaymorning.
　　it will be seen at once that this course， in all probability，would have resulted unsuccessfully. it would have beenimpossible for them to have gone into the fields and272
　　examine all the gangs at work. they were not aware thati was known only as platt； and had they inquired of eppshimself， he would have stated truly that he knew nothingof solomon northup.
　　the arrangement being adopted however ， there wasnothing further to be done until sunday had elapsed. theconversation between messrs. northup and waddill， in thecourse of the afternoon， turned upon new-york politics.
　　“i can scarcely comprehend the nice distinctions andshades of political parties in your state，” observed mr.
　　waddill. “i read of soft-shells and hard-shells， hunkersand barnburners， woolly-heads and silver-grays， andam unable to understand the precise difference betweenthem. pray， what is it？”
　　mr. northup， re-filling his pipe， entered into quite anelaborate narrative of the origin of the various sectionsof parties， and concluded by saying there was anotherparty in new-york， known as free-soilers or abolitionists.
　　“you have seen none of those in this part of the country， ipresume？” mr. northup remarked.
　　“never， but one，” answered waddill， laughingly. “wehave one here in marksville， an eccentric creature， whopreaches abolitionism as vehemently as any fanatic atthe north. he is a generous， inoffensive man， but alwaysmaintaining the wrong side of an argument. it affordsus a deal of amusement. he is an excellent mechanic，and almost indispensable in this community. he is acarpenter. his name is bass.”
　　some further good-natured conversation was hadat the expense of bass’ peculiarities， when waddill allat once fell into a reflective mood， and asked for themysterious letter again.
　　“let me see—l-e-t m-e s-e-e！” he repeated， thoughtfullyto himself， running his eyes over the letter once more.
　　“‘bayou boeuf， august 15.’ august 15—post-marked here.
　　‘he that is writing for me—’ where did bass work lastsummer？” he inquired， turning suddenly to his brother.
　　his brother was unable to inform him， but rising， left theoffice， and soon returned with the intelligence that “bassworked last summer somewhere on bayou boeuf.”
　　“he is the man，” ‘bringing down his hand emphaticallyon the table，’ “who can tell us all about solomon northup，”
　　exclaimed waddill.
　　bass was immediately searched for， but could notbe found. after some inquiry， it was ascertained he wasat the landing on red river. procuring a conveyance，young waddill and northup were not long in traversingthe few miles to the latter place. on their arrival， basswas found， just on the point of leaving， to be absent afortnight or more. after an introduction， northup beggedthe privilege of speaking to him privately a moment. theywalked together towards the river， when the followingconversation ensued：
　　“mr. bass，” said northup， “allow me to ask you if youwere on bayou boeuf last august？”
　　“yes， sir， i was there in august，” was the reply.
　　“did you write a letter for a colored man as that placeto some gentleman in saratoga springs？”
　　“excuse me， sir， if i say that is none of your business，”
　　answered bass， stopping and looking his interrogatorsearchingly in the face.
www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ



第76章 Chapter XXI.(3)


　　“perhaps i am rather hasty， mr. bass； i beg yourpardon； but i have come from the state of new-yorkto accomplish the purpose the writer of a letter datedthe 15th of august， post-marked at marksville， had inview. circumstances have led me to think that you areperhaps the man who wrote it. i am in search of solomonnorthup. if you know him， i beg you to inform mefrankly where he is， and i assure you the source of anyinformation you may give me shall not be divulged， if youdesire it not to be.”
　　a long time bass looked his new acquaintance steadilyin the eyes， without opening his lips. he seemed to bedoubting in his own mind if there was not an attemptto practice some deception upon him. finally he said，deliberately— “i have done nothing to be ashamed of.
　　i am the man who wrote the letter. if you have come torescue solomon northup， i am glad to see you.”
　　“when did you last see him， and where is he？” northupinquired.
　　“i last saw him christmas， a week ago to-day. he isthe slave of edwin epps， a planter on bayou boeuf， nearholmesville. he is not known as solomon northup； he iscalled platt.”
　　the secret was out—the mystery was unraveled.
　　through the thick， black cloud， amid whose dark anddismal shadows i had walked twelve years， broke thestar that was to light me back to liberty. all mistrust andhesitation were soon thrown aside， and the two menconversed long and freely upon the subject uppermostin their thoughts. bass expressed the interest he hadtaken in my behalf—his intention of going north in thespring， and declaring that he had resolved to accomplishmy emancipation， if it were in his power. he describedthe commencement and progress of his acquaintancewith me， and listened with eager curiosity to the accountgiven him of my family， and the history of my early life.
　　before separating， he drew a map of the bayou on a stripof paper with a piece of red chalk， showing the locality ofepps’ plantation， and the road leading most directly to it.
　　northup and his young companion returned to marksville， where it was determined to commence legalproceedings to test the question of my right to freedom. iwas made plaintiff， mr. northup acting as my guardian，and edwin epps defendant. the process to be issuedwas in the nature of replevin， directed to the sheriff ofthe parish， commanding him to take me into custody，and detain me until the decision of the court. by the timethe papers were duly drawn up， it was twelve o’clock atnight—too late to obtain the necessary signature of thejudge， who resided some distance out of town. furtherbusiness was therefore suspended until monday morning.
　　everything， apparently， was moving along swimmingly，until sunday afternoon， when waddill called at northup’sroom to express his apprehension of difficulties they hadnot expected to encounter. bass had become alarmed，and had placed his affairs in the hands of a person at thelanding， communicating to him his intention of leavingthe state. this person had betrayed the confidencereposed in him to a certain extent， and a rumor began tofloat about the town， that the stranger at the hotel， whohad been observed in the company of lawyer waddill，was after one of old epps， slaves， over on the bayou. eppswas known at marksville， having frequent occasion to visitthat place during the session of the courts， and the fearentertained by mr. northup’s adviser was， that intelligencewould be conveyed to him in the night， giving him anopportunity of secreting me before the arrival of the sheriff.
　　this apprehension had the effect of expediting mattersconsiderably. the sheriff， who lived in one directionfrom the village， was requested to hold himself inreadiness immediately after midnight， while the judgewas informed he would be called upon at the same time.
　　it is but justice to say， that the authorities at marksvillecheerfully rendered all the assistance in their power.
　　as soon after midnight as bail could be perfected， andthe judge’s signature obtained， a carriage， containingmr. northup and the sheriff， driven by the landlord’s son，rolled rapidly out of the village of marksville， on the roadtowards bayou boeuf.
　　it was supposed that epps would contest the issueinvolving my right to liberty， and it therefore suggesteditself to mr. northup， that the testimony of the sheriff，describing my first meeting with the former， mightperhaps become material on the trial. it was accordinglyarranged during the ride， that， before i had an opportunityof speaking to mr. northup， the sheriff should propoundto me certain questions agreed upon， such as the numberand names of my children， the name of my wife beforemarriage， of places i knew at the north， and so forth. ifmy answers corresponded with the statements given him，the evidence must necessarily be considered conclusive.
　　at length， shortly after epps had left the field， withthe consoling assurance that he would soon returnand warm us， as was stated in the conclusion of thepreceding chapter， they came in sight of the plantation，and discovered us at work. alighting from the carriage，and directing the driver to proceed to the great house，with instructions not to mention to any one the objectof their errand until they met again， northup and thesheriff turned from the highway， and came towards usacross the cotton field. we observed them， on looking upat the carriage—one several rods in advance of the other.
　　it was a singular and unusual thing to see white menapproaching us in that manner， and especially at thatearly hour in the morning， and uncle abram and patseymade some remarks， expressive of their astonishment.
　　walking up to bob， the sheriff inquired：
　　“where’s the boy they call platt？”
　　“thar he is， massa，” answered bob， pointing to me，and twitching off his hat.




第77章 Chapter XXI.(4)


　　i wondered to myself what business he could possiblyhave with me， and turning round， gazed at him until hehad approached within a step. during my long residenceon the bayou， i had become familiar with the face of everyplanter within many miles； but this man was an utterstranger—certainly i had never seen him before.
　　“your name is platt， is it？” he asked.
　　“yes， master，” i responded.
　　pointing towards northup， standing a few rods distant，he demanded—“do you know that man？”
　　i looked in the direction indicated， and as my eyesrested on his countenance， a world of images throngedmy brain； a multitude of well-known faces—anne’s，and the dear children’s， and my old dead father’s； allthe scenes and associations of childhood and youth；all the friends of other and happier days， appeared anddisappeared， flitting and floating like dissolving shadowsbefore the vision of my imagination， until at last theperfect memory of the man recurred to me， and throwingup my hands towards heaven， i exclaimed， in a voicelouder than i could utter in a less exciting moment—“henry b. northup！ thank god—thank god！”
　　in an instant i comprehended the nature of hisbusiness， and felt that the hour of my deliverance wasat hand. i started towards him， but the sheriff steppedbefore me.
　　“stop a moment，” said he； “have you any other namethan platt？”
　　“solomon northup is my name， master，” i replied.
　　“have you a family？” he inquired.
　　“i had a wife and three children.”
　　“what were your children’s names？”
　　“elizabeth， margaret and alonzo.”
　　“and your wife’s name before her marriage？”
　　“anne hampton.”
　　“who married you？”
　　“timothy eddy， of fort edward.”
　　“where does that gentleman live？” again pointing tonorthup， who remained standing in the same place wherei had first recognized him.
　　“he lives in sandy hill， washington county， newyork，” was the reply.
　　he was proceeding to ask further questions， but ipushed past him， unable longer to restrain myself. iseized my old acquaintance by both hands. i could notspeak. i could not refrain from tears.
　　“sol，” he said at length， “i’m glad to see you.”
　　i essayed to make some answer， but emotion chokedall utterance， and i was silent. the slaves， utterlyconfounded， stood gazing upon the scene， their openmouths and rolling eyes indicating the utmost wonderand astonishment. for ten years i had dwelt among them， in the field and in the cabin， borne the same hardships，partaken the same fare， mingled my griefs with theirs，participated in the same scanty joys； nevertheless， notuntil this hour， the last i was to remain among them， hadthe remotest suspicion of my true name， or the slightestknowledge of my real history， been entertained by anyone of them.
　　not a word was spoken for several minutes， duringwhich time i clung fast to northup， looking up into hisface， fearful i should awake and find it all a dream.
　　“throw down that sack，” northup added， finally； “yourcotton-picking days are over. come with us to the manyou live with.”
　　i obeyed him， and walking between him and thesheriff， we moved towards the great house. it wasnot until we had proceeded some distance that i hadrecovered my voice sufficiently to ask if my family wereall living. he informed me he had seen anne， margaretand elizabeth but a short time previously； that alonzowas still living， and all were well. my mother， however，i could never see again. as i began to recover in somemeasure from the sudden and great excitement whichso overwhelmed me， i grew faint and weak， insomuchit was with difficulty i could walk. the sheriff took holdof my arm and assisted me， or i think i should havefallen. as we entered the yard， epps stood by the gate，conversing with the driver. that young man， faithful tohis instructions， was entirely unable to give him the least  information in answer to his repeated inquiries of whatwas going on. by the time we reached him he was almostas much amazed and puzzled as bob or uncle abram.
　　shaking hands with the sheriff， and receiving anintroduction to mr. northup， he invited them into house，ordering me， at the same time， to bring in some wood. itwas some time before i succeeded in cutting an armful，scene in the cotton field， solomon delivered up.
　　having， somehow， unaccountably lost the power ofwielding the axe with any manner of precision. when ientered with it at last， the table was strewn with papers，from one of which northup was reading. i was probablylonger than necessity required， in placing the sticksupon the fire， being particular as to the exact position ofeach individual one of them. i heard the words， “the saidsolomon northup，” and “the deponent further says，” and“free citizen of new-york，” repeated frequently， and fromthese expressions understood that the secret i had solong retained from master and mistress epps， was finallydeveloping. i lingered as long as prudence permitted， andwas about leaving the room， when epps inquired，“platt， do you know this gentleman？”
　　“yes， master，” i replied， “i have known him as long as ican remember.”
　　“where does he live？”
　　“he lives in new-york.”
　　“did you ever live there？”
　　“yes， master—born and bred there.”
　　“you was free， then. now you d—d nigger，” he exclaimed，“why did you not tell me that when i bought you？”
　　“master epps，” i answered， in a somewhat differenttone than the one in which i had been accustomed toaddress him “master epps， you did not take the troubleto ask me； besides， i told one of my owners—the man thatkidnapped me—that i was free， and was whipped almostto death for it.”




第78章 Chapter XXI.(5)


　　“it seems there has been a letter written for you bysomebody. now， who is it？” he demanded， authoritatively.
　　i made no reply.
　　“i say， who wrote that letter？” he demanded again.
　　“perhaps i wrote it myself”， i said.
　　“you haven’t been to marksville post-office and backbefore light， i know.”
　　he insisted upon my informing him， and i insisted iwould not. he made many vehement threats against theman， whoever he might be， and intimated the bloody andsavage vengeance he would wreak upon him， when hefound him out. his whole manner and language exhibiteda feeling of anger towards the unknown person who hadwritten for me， and of fretfulness at the idea of losing somuch property. addressing mr. northup he swore if hehad only had an hour’s notice of his coming， he wouldhave saved him the trouble of taking me back to new-york； that he would have run me into the swamp， or someother place out of the way， where all the sheriffs on earthcouldn’t have found me.
　　i walked out into the yard， and was entering thekitchen door， when something struck me in the back.
　　aunt phebe， emerging from the back door of thegreat house with a pan of potatoes， had thrown one ofthem with unnecessary violence， thereby giving me tounderstand that she wished to speak to me a momentconfidentially. running up to me， she whispered in myear with great earnestness，
　　“lor a’ mity， platt！ what d’ye think？ dem two men comeafter ye. heard ’em tell masse you free— got wife and treechildren back thar whar you come from. goin’ wid ’em？
　　fool if ye don’t—wish i could go，” and aunt phebe ran onin this manner at a rapid rate.
　　presently mistress epps made her appearance in thekitchen. she said many things to me， and wondered whyi had not told her who i was. she expressed her regret，complimenting me by saying she had rather lose anyother servant on the plantation. had patsey that daystood in my place， the measure of my mistress’ joy wouldhave overflowed. now there was no one left who couldmend a chair or a piece of furniture—no one who was ofany use about the house—no one who could play for heron the violin —and mistress epps was actually affected totears.
　　epps had called to bob to bring up his saddle horse. theother slaves， also， overcoming their fear of the penalty， hadleft their work and come to the yard. they were standingbehind the cabins， out of sight of epps. they beckoned me tocome to them， and with all the eagerness of curiosity， excitedto the highest pitch， conversed with and questioned me. ifi could repeat the exact words they uttered， with the sameemphasis—if i could paint their several attitudes， and theexpression of their countenances—it would be indeed aninteresting picture. in their estimation， i had suddenlyarisen to an immeasurable height—had become a being ofimmense importance.
　　the legal papers having been served， and arrangementsmade with epps to meet them the next day at marksville，northup and the sheriff entered the carriage to return tothe latter place. as i was about mounting to the driver’sseat， the sheriff said i ought to bid mr. and mrs. eppsgood bye. i ran back to the piazza where they werestanding， and taking off my hat， said，
　　“good-bye， missis.”
　　“good-bye， platt，” said mrs. epps， kindly.
　　“good-bye， master.”
　　“ah！ you d--d nigger，” muttered epps， in a surly， malicioustone of voice， “you needn’t feel so cussed tickled—you ain’tgone yet—i’ll see about this business at marksville tomorrow.”
　　i was only a “nigger” and knew my place， but felt asstrongly as if i had been a white man， that it would havebeen an inward comfort， had i dared to have given him aparting kick. on my way back toward the carriage， patseyran from behind a cabin and threw her arms about myneck.
　　“oh！ platt，” she cried， tears streaming down her face，“you’re goin’ to be free—you’re goin’ way off yonder wherewe’ll neber see ye any more. you’ve saved me a good manywhipping， platt； i’m glad you’re goin’ to be free—but oh！
　　de lord， de lord！ what’ll become of me？”
　　i disengaged myself from her， and entered thecarriage. the driver cracked his whip and away we rolled.
　　i looked back and saw patsey， with drooping head， half reclining on the ground； mrs. epps was on the piazza；uncle abram， and bob， and wiley， and aunt phebe stoodby the gate， gazing after me. i waved my hand， but thecarriage turned a bend of the bayou， hiding them frommy eyes forever.
　　we stopped a moment at carey’s sugar house， where agreat number of slaves were at work， such an establishmentbeing a curiosity to a northern man. epps dashed by uson horseback at full speed—on the way， as we learnednext day， to the “pine woods，” to see william ford， whohad brought me into the country.
　　tuesday， the fourth of january， epps and his counsel，the hon. h. taylor， northup， waddill， the judge andsheriff of avoyelles， and myself， met in a room in thevillage of marksville. mr. northup stated the facts inregard to me， and presented his commission， and theaffidavits accompanying it. the sheriff described thescene in the cotton field. i was also interrogated at greatlength. finally， mr. taylor assured his client that he wassatisfied， and that litigation would not only be expensive，but utterly useless. in accordance with his advice， a paperwas drawn up and signed by the proper parties， whereinepps acknowledged he was satisfied of my right tofreedom， and formally surrendered me to the authoritiesof new-york. it was also stipulated that it be entered ofrecord in the recorder’s office of avoyelles.aa see appendix c.
　　mr. northup and myself immediately hastened to thelanding， and taking passage on the first steamer thatarrived， were soon floating down red river， up which，with such desponding thoughts， i had been borne twelveyears before.
 。下 书网



第79章 Chapter XXII.(1)


　　as the steamer glided on its way towards new-orleans， perhaps i was not happy—perhaps there was nodifficulty in restraining myself from dancing round thedeck—perhaps i did not feel grateful to the man who hadcome so many hundred miles for me—perhaps i did notlight his pipe， and wait and watch his word， and run athis slightest bidding. if i didn’t—well， no matter.
　　we tarried at new-orleans two days. during that timei pointed out the locality of freeman’s slave pen， andthe room in which ford purchased me. we happened tomeet theophilus in the street， but i did not think it worthwhile to renew acquaintance with him. from respectablecitizens we ascertained he had become a low， miserablerowdy—a broken-down， disreputable man.
　　we also visited the recorder， mr. genois， to whomsenator soule’s letter was directed， and found him a manwell deserving the wide and honorable reputation thathe bears. he very generously furnished us with a sortof legal pass， over his signature and seal of office， andas it contains the recorder’s deion of my personalappearance， it may not be amiss to insert it here. thefollowing is a copy：
　　“state of louisiana—city of new-orleans：
　　recorder’s office， second district.
　　to all to whom these presents shall come：—
　　this is to certify that henry b. northup， esquire， of thecounty of washington， new-york， has produced before medue evidence of the freedom of solomon， a mulatto man， agedabout forty-two years， five feet， seven inches and six lines，woolly hair， and chestnut eyes， who is a native born of the stateof new-york. that the said northup， being about bringing thesaid solomon to his native place， through the southern routes，the civil authorities are requested to let the aforesaid coloredman solomon pass unmolested， he demeaning well andproperly.
　　given under my hand and the seal of the city of new-orleans this 7th january， 1853.
　　[ l. s. ] “th. genois， recorder.”
　　on the 8th we came to lake pontchartrain， by railroad， and， in due time， following the usual route，reached charleston. after going on board the steamboat，and paying our passage at this city， mr. northup wascalled upon by a custom-house officer to explain whyhe had not registered his servant. he replied that hehad no servant—that， as the agent of new-york， he wasaccompanying a free citizen of that state from slaveryto freedom， and did not desire nor intend to make anyregistry whatever. i conceived from his conversation andmanner， though i may perhaps be entirely mistaken， thatno great pains would be taken to avoid whatever difficultythe charleston officials. might deem proper to create.
　　at length， however， we were permitted to proceed， and，passing through richmond， where i caught a glimpse ofgoodin’s pen， arrived in washington january 17th， 1853.
　　we ascertained that both burch and radburn werestill residing in that city. immediately a complaint wasentered with a police magistrate of washington， againstjames h. burch， for kidnapping and selling me intoslavery. he was arrested upon a warrant issued by justicegoddard， and returned before justice mansel， and heldto bail in the sum of three thousand dollars. when firstarrested， burch was much excited， exhibiting the utmostfear and alarm， and before reaching the justice’s office onlouisiana avenue， and before knowing the precise natureof the complaint， begged the police to permit him toconsult benjamin o. shekels， a slave trader of seventeenyears’ standing， and his former partner. the latterbecame his bail.
　　at ten o’clock， the 18th of january， both partiesappeared before the magistrate. senator chase， of ohio，hon. orville clark， of sandy hill， and mr.northup actedas counsel for the prosecution， and joseph h. bradley forthe defence.
　　gen. orville clark was called and sworn as a witness，and testified that he had known me from childhood， andthat i was a free man， as was my father before me. mr.
　　northup then testified to the same， and proved the factsconnected with his mission to avoyelles.
　　ebenezer radburn was then sworn for the prosecution， and testified he was forty-eight years old； that he was aresident of washington， and had known burch fourteenyears； that in 1841 he was keeper of williams’ slavepen； that he remembered the fact of my confinementin the pen that year. at this point it was admitted bythe defendant’s counsel， that i had been placed in thepen by burch in the spring of 1841， and hereupon theprosecution rested.
　　benjamin o. shekels was then offered as a witness bythe prisoner. benjamin is a large， coarse-featured man，and the reader may perhaps get a somewhat correctconception of him by reading the exact language he usedin answer to the first question of defendant’s lawyer. hewas asked the place of his nativity， and his reply， utteredin a sort of rowdyish way， was in these very words—“i was born in ontario county， new-york， and weighedfourteen pounds！”
　　benjamin was a prodigious baby！ he further testifiedthat he kept the steamboat hotel in washington in1841， and saw me there in the spring of that year. hewas proceeding to state what he had heard two men say，when senator chase raised a legal objection， to wit， thatthe sayings of third persons， being hearsay， was improperevidence. the objection was overruled by the justice， andshekels continued， stating that two men came to his hoteland represented they had a colored man for sale； thatthey had an interview with burch； that they stated theycame from georgia， but he did not remember the county； that they gave a full history of the boy， saying he was abricklayer， and played on the violin； that burch remarkedhe would purchase if they could agree； that they wentout and brought the boy in， and that i was the sameperson. he further testified， with as much unconcern asif it was the truth， that i represented i was born and bredin georgia； that one of the young men with me was mymaster； that i exhibited a great deal of regret at partingwith him， and he believed “got into tears！”—nevertheless，that i insisted my master had a right to sell me； that heought to sell me； and the remarkable reason i gave was，according to shekels， because he， my master， “had beengambling and on a spree！”
下~书~网



第80章 Chapter XXII.(2)


　　he continued， in these words， copied from the minutestaken on the examination： “burch interrogated the boy inthe usual manner， told him if he purchased him he shouldsend him south. the boy said he had no objection， that infact he would like to go south. burch paid $650 for him，to my knowledge. i don’t know what name was given him，but think it was not solomon. did not know the nameof either of the two men. they were in my tavern two orthree hours， during which time the boy played on theviolin. the bill of sale was signed in my bar-room. it wasa printed blank， filled up by burch. before 1838 burchwas my partner. our business was buying and sellingslaves. after that time he was a partner of theophilusfreeman， of new-orleans. burch bought here—freemansold there！”
　　shekels， before testifying， had heard my relation of thecircumstances connected with the visit to washingtonwith brown and hamilton， and therefore， it was，undoubtedly， he spoke of “two men，” and of my playingon the violin. such was his fabrication， utterly untrue，and yet there was found in washington a man whoendeavored to corroborate him.
　　benjamin a. thorn testified he was at shekels’ in 1841，and saw a colored boy playing on a fiddle. “shekels saidhe was for sale. heard his master tell him he should sellhim. the boy acknowledged to me he was a slave. i wasnot present when the money was paid. will not swearpositively this is the boy. the master came near sheddingtears： i think the boy did！ i have been engaged in thebusiness of taking slaves south， off and on， for twentyyears. when i can’t do that i do something else.”
　　i was then offered as a witness， but， objection beingmade， the court decided my evidence inadmissible. it wasrejected solely on the ground that i was a colored man—the fact of my being a free citizen of new-york not beingdisputed.
　　shekels having testified there was a bill of saleexecuted， burch was called upon by the prosecution toproduce it， inasmuch as such a paper would corroboratethe testimony of thorn and shekels. the prisoner’scounsel saw the necessity of exhibiting it， or giving somereasonable explanation for its non-production. to effectthe latter， burch himself was offer—as a witness in his own behalf. it was contended by counsel for the people，that such testimony should not be allowed—that it was incontravention of every rule of evidence， and if permittedwould defeat the ends of justice. his testimony， however，was received by the court！ he made oath that such a billof sale had been drawn up and signed， but he had lostit， and did not know what had become of it！ thereuponthe magistrate was requested to dispatch a police officerto burch’s residence， with directions to bring his books，containing his bills of sales for the year 1841. the requestwas granted， and before any measure could be takento prevent it， the officer had obtained possession of thebooks， and brought them into court. the sales for theyear 1841 were found， and carefully examined， but no saleof myself， by any name， was discovered！
　　upon this testimony the court held the fact to beestablished， that burch came innocently and honestly byme， and accordingly he was discharged.
　　an attempt was then made by burch and his satellites，to fasten upon me the charge that i had conspired withthe two white men to defraud him—with what success，appears in an extract taken from an article in the new-york times， published a day or two subsequent to thetrial： “the counsel for the defendant had drawn up，before the defendant was discharged； an affidavit， signedby burch， and had a warrant out against the colored manfor a conspiracy with the two white men before referredto， to defraud burch out of six hundred and twenty-five dollars. the warrant was served， and the colored manarrested and brought before officer goddard. burchand his witnesses appeared in court， and h. b. northupappeared as counsel for the colored man， stating he wasready to proceed as counsel on the part of the defendant，and asking no delay whatever. burch， after consultingprivately a short time with shekels， stated to themagistrate that he wished him to dismiss the complaint，as he would not proceed farther with it. defendant’scounsel stated to the magistrate that if the complaint waswithdrawn， it must be without the request or consent ofthe defendant. burch then asked the magistrate to lethim have the complaint and the warrant， and he tookthem. the counsel for the defendant objected to hisreceiving them， and insisted they should remain as partof the records of the court， and that the court shouldendorse the proceedings which had been had under theprocess. burch delivered them up， and the court rendereda judgement of discontinuance by the request of theprosecutor， and filed it in his office.”
　　there may be those who will affect to believe thestatement of the slave-trader—those， in whose mindshis allegations will weigh heavier than mine. i am a poorcolored man—one of a down-trodden and degradedrace， whose humble voice may not be heeded by theoppressor—but knowing the truth， and with a full sense ofmy accountability， i do solemnly declare before men， andbefore god， that any charge or assertion， that i conspired  directly or indirectly with any person or persons to sellmyself； that any other account of my visit to washington，my capture and imprisonment in williams’ slave pen，than is contained in these pages， is utterly and absolutelyfalse. i never played on the violin in washington. i neverwas in the steamboat hotel， and never saw thorn orshekels， to my knowledge， in my life， until last january.
www．Ｌｚｕｏｗｅｎ．ｃｏｍwww.ｌzuoＷeＮ．ＣＯＭ



第81章 Chapter XXII.(3)


　　the story of the trio of slave-traders is a fabrication asabsurd as it is base and unfounded. were it true， i shouldnot have turned aside on my way back to liberty for thepurpose of prosecuting burch. i should have avoidedrather than sought him. i should have known that sucha step would have resulted in rendering me infamous.
　　under the circumstances —longing as i did to behold myfamily， and elated with the prospect of returning home—it is an outrage upon probability to suppose i would haverun the hazard， not only of exposure， but of a criminalprosecution and conviction， by voluntarily placing myselfin the position i did， if the statements of burch and hisconfederates contain a particle of truth. i took pains toseek him out， to confront him in a court of law， charginghim with the crime of kidnapping； and the only motivethat impelled me to this step， was a burning sense of thewrong he had inflicted upon me， and a desire to bringhim to justice. he was acquitted， in the manner， and bysuch means as have been described. a human tribunalhas permitted him to escape； but there is another and ahigher tribunal， where false testimony will not prevail，and where i am willing， so far at least as these statementsare concerned， to be judged at last.
　　we left washington on the 20th of january， andproceeding by the way of philadelphia， new-york， andalbany， reached sandy hill in the night of the 21st. myheart overflowed with happiness as i looked around uponold familiar scenes， and found myself in the midst offriends of other days. the following morning i started， incompany with several acquaintances， for glens falls， theresidence of anne and our children.
　　as i entered their comfortable cottage， margaretwas the first that met me. she did not recognize me.
　　when i left her， she was but seven years old， a littleprattling girl， playing with her toys. now she was grownto womanhood—was married， with a bright-eyed boystanding by her side. not forgetful of his enslaved，unfortunate grand-father， she had named the childsolomon northup staunton. when told who i was，she was overcome with emotion， and unable to speak.
　　presently elizabeth entered the room， and anne camerunning from the hotel， having been informed of myarrival. they embraced me， and with tears flowing downtheir cheeks， hung upon my neck. but i draw a veil over ascene which can better be imagined than described.
　　when the violence of our emotions had subsided to asacred joy—when the household gathered round the fire，that sent out its warm and crackling comfort throughthe room， we conversed of the thousand events that had occurred—the hopes and fears， the joys and sorrows， thetrials and troubles we had each experienced during thelong separation. alonzo was absent in the western partof the state. the boy had written to his mother a shorttime previous， of the prospect of his obtaining sufficientarrival home and first meeting with his wife and children.
　　money to purchase my freedom. from his earliestyears， that had been the chief object of his thoughts andhis ambition. they knew i was in bondage. the letterwritten on board the brig， and clem ray himself ， hadgiven them that information. but where i was， untilthe arrival of bass’ letter， was a matter of conjecture.
　　elizabeth and margaret once returned from school— soanne informed me—weeping bitterly. on inquiring thecause of the children’s sorrow， it was found that， whilestudying geography， their attention had been attracted tothe picture of slaves working in the cotton-field， and anoverseer following them with his whip. it reminded themof the sufferings father might be， and， as it happened，actually was， enduring in the south. numerous incidents，such as these， were related—incidents showing they stillheld me in constant remembrance， but not， perhaps， ofsufficient interest to the reader， to be recounted.
　　my narrative is at an end. i have no comments to makeupon the subject of slavery. those who read this bookmay form their own opinions of the “peculiar institution.”
　　what it may be in other states， i do not profess toknow； what it is in the region of red river， is truly andfaithfully delineated in these pages. this is no fiction，no exaggeration. if i have failed in anything， it has beenin presenting to the reader too prominently the brightside of the picture. i doubt not hundreds have been asunfortunate as myself； that hundreds of free citizens havebeen kidnapped and sold into slavery， and are at this moment wearing out their lives on plantations in texasand louisiana. but i forbear. chastened and subdued inspirit by the sufferings i have borne， and thankful to thatgood being through whose mercy i have been restoredto happiness and liberty， i hope henceforward to lead anupright though lowly life， and rest at last in the churchyard where my father sleeps.
　　roaring river.
　　a refrain of the red river plantation.
　　“harper’s creek and roarin’ ribber，
　　thar， my dear， we’ll live forebber；
　　den we’ll go to de ingin nation，
　　all i want in dis creation，
　　is pretty little wife and big plantation.
　　chorus.
　　up dat oak and down dat ribber，
　　two overseers and one little nigger”
　　appendix.
　　a.
　　an act more effectually to protect the free citizens ofthis state from being kidnapped， or reduced to slavery.
　　[passed may 14， 1840]
　　the people of the state of new-york， represented insenate and assembly， do enact as follows：




第82章 Chapter XXII.(4)


　　1. whenever the governor of this state shall receiveinformation satisfactory to him that any free citizenor any inhabitant of this state has been kidnapped ortransported away out of this state， into any other stateor territory of the united states， for the purpose ofbeing there held in slavery； or that such free citizenor inhabitant is wrongfully seized， imprisoned or heldin slavery in any of the states or territories of theunited states， on the allegation or pretence that such aperson is a slave， or by color of any usage or rule of lawprevailing in such state or territory， is deemed or takento be a slave， or not entitled of right to the personalliberty belonging to a citizen； it shall be the duty of thesaid governor to take such measures as he shall deem  necessary to procure such person to be restored to hisliberty and returned to this state. the governor is herebyauthorized to appoint and employ such agent or agentsas he shall deem necessary to effect the restoration andreturn of such person； and shall furnish the said agentwith such credentials and instructions as will be likely toaccomplish the object of his appointment. the governormay determine the compensation to be allowed to suchagent for his services besides his necessary expenses.
　　2. such agent shall proceed to collect the proper proofto establish the right of such person to his freedom，and shall perform such journeys， take such measures，institute and procure to be prosecuted such legalproceedings， under the direction of the governor， as shallbe necessary to procure such person to be restored to hisliberty and returned to this state.
　　3. the accounts for all services and expenses incurredin carrying this act into effect shall be audited by thecomptroller， and paid by the treasurer on his warrant，out of any moneys in the treasury of this state nototherwise appropriated. the treasurer may advance， onthe warrant of the comptroller， to such agent， such sumor sums as the governor shall certify to be reasonableadvances to enable him to accomplish the purposes of hisappointment， for which advance such agent shall account，on the final audit of his warrant.
　　4. this act shall take effect immediately.
　　b.
　　memorial of anne.
　　to his excellency， the governor of the state of new-york：
　　the memorial of anne northup， of the village of glensfalls， in the county of warren， state aforesaid， respectfullysets forth—
　　that your memorialist， whose maiden name was annehampton， was forty-four years old on the 14th day ofmarch last， and was married to solomon northup， thenof fort edward， in the county of washington and stateaforesaid， on the 25th day of december， a. d. 1828，by timothy eddy， then a justice of the peace. that thesaid solomon， after such marriage， lived and kept housewith your memorialist in said town until 1830， when heremoved with his said family to the town of kingsbury insaid county， and remained there about three years， andthen removed to saratoga springs in the state aforesaid，and continued to reside in said saratoga springs and theadjoining town until about the year 1841， as near as thetime can be recollected， when the said solomon started togo to the city of washington， in the district of columbia，since which time your memorialist has never seen hersaid husband.
　　and your memorialist further states， that in the year1841 she received information by a letter directed tohenry b. northup， esq.， of sandy hill， washingtoncounty， new-york， and post-marked at new-orleans， thatsaid solomon had been kidnapped in washington， puton board of a vessel， and was then in such vessel in new-orleans， but could not tell how he came in that situation，nor what his destination was.
　　that your memorialist ever since the last mentionedperiod has been wholly unable to obtain any informationof where the said solomon was， until the month ofseptember last， when another letter was received fromthe said solomon， post-marked at marksville， in theparish of avoyelles， in the state of louisiana， statingthat he was held there as a slave， which statement yourmemorialist believes to be true.
　　that the said solomon is about forty-five years of age，and never resided out of the state of new-york， in whichstate he was born， until the time he went to washingtoncity， as before stated. that the said solomon northupis a free citizen of the state of new-york， and is nowwrongfully held in slavery， in or near marksville， in theparish of avoyelles， in the state of louisiana， one of theunited states of america， on the allegation or pretencethat the said solomon is a slave.
　　and your memorialist further states that mintusnorthup was the reputed father of said solomon， andwas a negro， and died at fort edward， on the 22d day of november， 1829； that the mother of said solomon was amulatto， or three quarters white， and died in the countyof oswego， new-york， some five or six years ago， as yourmemorialist was informed and believes， and never was aslave.
　　that your memorialist and her family are poor andwholly unable to pay or sustain any portion of theexpenses of restoring the said solomon to his freedom.
　　your excellency is entreated to employ such agentor agents as shall be deemed necessary to effect therestoration and return of said solomon northup， inpursuance of an act of the legislature of the state ofnew-york， passed may 14th， 1840， entitled “an actmore effectually to protect the free citizens of this statefrom being kidnappd or reduced to slavery.” and yourmemorialist will ever pray.
　　（signed，） anne northup.
　　dated november 19，1852.
　　state of new-york：
　　washington county， ss.
　　anne northup， of the village of glens falls， in thecounty of warren， in said state， being duly sworn， dothdepose and say that she signed the above memorial， andthat the statements therein contained are true.
　　（signed，） anne northup.
　　subscribed and sworn before me this
　　19th november， 1852.
　　charles hughes， justice peace.
　　we recommend that the governor appoint henry b.




第83章 Chapter XXII.(5)


　　northup， of the village of sandy hill， washington county，new-york， as one of the agents to procure the restorationand return of solomon northup， named in the foregoingmemorial of anne northup.
　　dated at sandy hill， washington co.， n. y.，
　　november 20， 1852. （signed，）
　　peter holbrook， daniel sweet，
　　b. f. hoag， almon clark，
　　charles hughes， benjamin ferris，
　　e. d. baker， josiah h. brown
　　orville clark.
　　state of new-york：
　　washington county， ss：
　　josiah hand， of the village of sandy hill， in saidcounty， being duly sworn， says， he is fifty-seven years old，and was born in said village， and has always resided there；that he has known mintus northup and his son solomon，named in the annexed memorial of anne northup， sinceprevious to the year 1816； that mintus northup then， anduntil the time of his death， cultivated a farm in the townsof kingsbury and fort edward， from the time deponentfirst knew him until he died； that said mintus and his wife， the mother of said solomon northup， were reportedto be free citizens of new-york， and deponent believesthey were so free； that said solomon northup was bornin said county of washington， as deponent believes， andwas married dec. 25th， 1828， in fort edward aforesaid，and his said wife and three children—two daughters andone son— are now living in glens falls， warren county，new-york， and that the said solomon northup alwaysresided in said county of washington， and its immediatevicinity， until about 1841， since which time deponent hasnot seen him， but deponent has been credibly informed，and as he verily believes truly， the said solomon is nowwrongfully held as a slave in the state of louisiana. anddeponent further says that anne northup， named in thesaid memorial， is entitled to credit， and deponent believesthe statements contained in her said memorial are true.
　　（signed，） josiah hand.
　　subscribed and sworn before me this
　　19th day of november， 1852，
　　charles hughes， justice peace.
　　state of new-york：
　　washington county， ss：
　　timothy eddy， of fort edward， in said county， beingduly sworn， says he is now over—years old， and has beena resident of said town more than—years last past， andthat he was well acquainted with solomon northup，310
　　named in the annexed memorial of anne northup， andwith his father， mintus northup， who was a negro，—thewife of said mintus was a mulatto woman； that saidmintus northup and his said wife and family， two sons，joseph and solomon， resided in said town of fort edwardfor several years before the year 1828， and said mintusdied in said town a. d. 1829， as deponent believes. anddeponent further says that he was a justice of the peacein said town in the year 1828， and as such justice of thepeace， he， on the 25th day of dec’r， 1828， joined the saidsolomon northup in marriage with anne hampton，who is the same person who has subscribed the annexedmemorial. and deponent expressly says， that saidsolomon was a free citizen of the state of new-york， andalways lived in said state， until about the year a. d. 1840，since which time deponent has not seen him， but hasrecently been informed， and as deponent believes truly，that said solomon northup is wrongfully held in slaveryin or near marksville， in the parish of avoyelles， in thestate of louisiana. and deponent further says， that saidmintus northup was nearly sixty years old at the time ofhis death， and was， for more than thirty years next priorto his death， a free citizen of the state of new-york.
　　and this deponent further says， that anne northup，the wife of said solomon northup， is of good characterand reputation， and her statements， as contained in thememorial hereto annexed， are entitled to full credit.
　　（signed，） timothy eddy.
　　subscribed and sworn before me this
　　19th day of november， 1852，
　　tim’y stoughton， justice.
　　state of new-york：
　　washington county， ss：
　　henry b. northup， of the village of sandy hill， insaid county， being duly sworn， says， that he is fortysevenyears old， and has always lived in said county；that he knew mintus northup， named in the annexedmemorial， from deponent’s earliest recollection untilthe time of his death， which occurred at fort edward， insaid county， in 1829； that deponent knew the childrenof said mintus， viz， solomon and joseph； that they wereboth born in the county of washington aforesaid， asdeponent believes； that deponent was well acquaintedwith said solomon， who is the same person named in theannexed memorial of anne northup， from his childhood；and that said solomon always resided in said countyof washington and the adjoining counties until aboutthe year 1841； that said solomon could read and write；that said solomon and his mother and father were freecitizens of the state of new-york； that sometime aboutthe year 1841 this deponent received a letter from saidsolomon， post-marked new-orleans， stating that whileon business at washington city， he had been kidnapped，and his free papers taken from him， and he was thenon board a vessel， in irons， and was claimed as a slave， and that he did not know his destination， which thedeponent believes to be true， and he urged this deponentto assist in procuring his restoration to freedom； thatdeponent has lost or mislaid said letter， and cannot findit； that deponent has since endeavored to find where saidsolomon was， but could get no farther trace of him untilsept. last， when this deponent ascertained by a letterpurporting to have been written by the direction of saidsolomon， that said solomon was held and claimed as aslave in or near marksville， in the parish of avoyelles，louisiana， and that this deponent verily believes thatsuch information is true， and that said solomon is nowwrongfully held in slavery at marksville aforesaid.
http://



第84章 Chapter XXII.(6)


　　（signed，） henry b. northup.
　　subscribed and sworn to before me
　　this 20th day of november， 1852，
　　charles hughes， j.p.
　　state of new-york：
　　washington county， ss
　　nicholas c. northup， of the visage of sandy hill， insaid county， being duly sworn， doth depose and say， thathe is now fifty-eight years of age， and has known solomonnorthup， mentioned in the annexed memorial of annnorthup， ever since he was born. and this deponent saiththat said solomon is now about forty-five years old， andwas born in the county of washington aforesaid， or inthe county of essex， in said state， and always resided inthe state of new-york until about the year 1841， sincewhich time deponent has not seen him or known wherehe was， until a few weeks since， deponent was informed，and believes truly， that said solomon was held in slaveryin the state of louisiana. deponent further says， thatsaid solomon was married in the town of fort edward，in said county， about twenty-four years ago， and that hiswife and two daughters and one son now reside in thevillage of glens falls， county of warren， in said state ofnew-york. and this deponent swears positively that saidsolomon northup is a citizen of said state of new-york，and was born free， and from his earliest infancy lived andresided in the counties of washington， essex， warren andsaratoga， in the state of new-york， and that his said wifeand children have never resided out of said counties sincethe time said solomon was married； that deponent knewthe father of said solomon northup； that said father wasa negro named mintus northup， and died in the town offort edward， in the county of washington， state of new-york， on the 22d day of november， a. d. 1829， and wasburied in the grave-yard in sandy hill aforesaid； that formore than thirty years before his death he lived in thecounties of essex， washington and rensselaer and stateof new-york， and left a wife， and two sons， joseph andthe said solomon， him surviving； that the mother of saidsolomon was a mulatto woman， and is now dead， anddied， as deponent believes， in oswego county， new-york，within five or six years past. and this deponent furtherstates， that the mother of the said solomon northupwas not a slave at the time of the birth of said solomonnorthup， and has not been a slave at any time within thelast fifty years.
　　（signed，） n. c. northup.
　　subscribed and sworn before me this 19th day
　　of november， 1852， charles hughes， justice peace.
　　state of new-york：
　　washington county， ss.
　　orville clark， of the village of sandy hill， in the.county of washington， state of new-york， being dulysworn， doth depose and say—that he， this deponent， isover fifty years of age； that in the years 1810 and 1811，or most of the time of those years， this deponent residedat sandy hill， aforesaid， and at glens falls； that thisdeponent then knew mintus northup， a black or coloredman； he was then a free man， as this deponent believesand always understood； that the wife of said mintusnorthup， and mother of solomon， was a free woman；that from the year 1818 until the time of the death of saidmintus northup， about the year 1829， this deponent wasvery well acquainted with the said mintus northup； thathe was a respectable man in the community in which heresided， and was a free man， so taken and esteemed by allhis acquaintances； that this deponent has also been and was acquainted with his son solomon northup， from thesaid year 1818 until he left this part of the country， aboutthe year 1840 or 1841； that he married anne hampton，daughter of william hampton， a near neighbor of thisdeponent； that the said anne， wife of said solomon，is now living and resides in this vicinity； that the saidmintus northup and william hampton were both reputedand esteemed in this community as respectable men.
　　and this deponent saith that the said mintus northupand his family， and the said william hampton and hisfamily， from the earliest recollection and acquaintance ofthis deponent with him （as far back as 1810，） were alwaysreputed， esteemed， and taken to be， and this deponentbelieves， truly so， free citizens of the state of new-york.
　　this deponent knows the said william hampton， underthe laws of this state， was entitled to vote at our elections，and he believes the said mintus northup also was entitledas a free citizen with the property qualification.
　　and this deponent further saith， that the said solomonnorthup， son of said mintus， and husband of said annehampton， when he left this state， was at the time thereofa free citizen of the state of new-york. and this deponentfurther saith， that said anne hampton， wife of solomonnorthup， is a respectable woman， of good character， andi would believe her statements， and do believe the factsset forth in her memorial to his excellency， the governor，in relation to her said husband， are true.




第85章 Chapter XXII.(7)


　　（signed，） orville clark.
　　sworn before me， november
　　19th， 1852.        u. g. paris， justice of the peace.
　　state of new-york：
　　washington county， ss.
　　benjamin ferris， of the village of sandy hill， in saidcounty， being duly sworn， doth depose and say—thathe is now fifty-seven years old， and has resided in saidvillage forty-five years； that he was as well acquaintedwith mintus northup， named in the annexed memorialof anne northup， from the year 1816 to the time of hisdeath， which occurred at fort edward， in the fall of 1829；that he knew the children of the said mintus， namely，joseph northup and solomon northup， and that the saidsolomon is the same person named in said memorial；that said mintus resided in the said county of washingtonto the time of his death， and was， during all that time， afree citizen of the said state of new-york， as deponentverify believes； that said memorialist， anne northup， is awoman of good character， and the statement contained inher memorial is entitled to credit.
　　（signed） benjamin ferris.
　　sworn before me， november
　　19th， 1852.
　　u. g. paris， justice of the peace.
　　state of new-york：
　　executive chamber， albany， nov. 30， 1852.
　　i hereby certify that the foregoing is a correct copy ofcertain proofs filed in the executive department， uponwhich i have appointed henry b. northup an agentof this state， to take proper proceedings in behalf ofsolomon northup there， in mentioned.
　　（signed，） washington hunt.
　　by the governor.
　　j. f. r.， private secretary.
　　state of new-york：
　　executive department.
　　washington hunt， governor of the state of new-york， to whom it may concern， greeting：
　　whereas， i have received information on oath， whichis satisfactary to me， that solomon northup， who is a freecitizen of this state， is wrongfully held in slavery， in thestate of louisiana：
　　and whereas， it is made my duty， by the laws of thisstate， to take such measures as i shall deem necessary toprocure any citizen so wrongfully held in slavery， to berestored to his liberty and returned to this state：
　　be it known， that in pursuance of chapter 375 of thelaws of this state， passed in 1840， i have constituted，appointed and employed henry b. northup， esquire，of the county of washington， in this state， an agent，318
　　with full power to effect the restoration of said solomonnorthup， and the said agent is hereby authorizedand empowered to institute such proper and legalproceedings， to procure such evidence， retain suchcounsel， and finally to take such measures as will be mostlikely to accomplish the object of his said appointment.
　　he is also instructed to proceed to the state oflouisiana with all convenient dispatch， to execute theagency hereby created.
　　in witness whereof， i have hereunto subscribed myname， and affixed the privy seal of the state， at albany，this 23d day of november， in the year of our lord 1852.
　　（signed，） washington hunt.
　　james e. ruggles， private secretary.
　　c.
　　state of louisiana：
　　parish of avoyelles.
　　before me， aristide barbin， recorder of the parishof avoyelles， personally came and appeared henry b.
　　northup， of the county of washington， state of new-york， who hath declared that by virtue of a commissionto him as agent of the state of new-york， given andgranted by his excellency， washington hunt， governorof the said state of new-york， bearing date the 23d dayof november， 1852， authorizing and empowering him，the said northup， to pursue and recover from slavery afree man of color， called solomon northup， who is a freecitizen of the state of new-york， and who was kidnappedand sold into slavery， in the state of louisiana， andnow in the possession of edwin epps， of the state oflouisiana， of the parish of avoyelles； he， the said agent，hereto signing， acknowledges that the said edwin hasthis day given and surrendered to him as such agent， thesaid solomon northup， free man of color， as aforesaid，in order that he be restored to his freedom， and carriedback to the said state of new-york， pursuant to saidcommission， the said edwin epps being satisfied fromthe proofs produced by said agent， that the said solomon northup is entitled to his freedom. the parties consentingthat a certified copy of said power of attorney be annexedto this act.
　　done and signed at marksville， parish of avoyelles，this fourth day of january， one thousand eight hundredand fifty-three， in the presence of the undersigned， legaland competent witnesses， who have also hereto signed.
　　（signed，） henry b. northup.
　　edwin epps.
　　ade. barbin， recorder.
　　witnesses：
　　h. taylor，
　　john p. waddill.
　　state of louisiana：
　　parish of avoyelles.
　　i do hereby certify the foregoing to be a true andcorrect copy of the original on file and of record in myoffice.
　　given under my hand and seal of office as recorder inand for the parish of avoyelles， this 4th day of january， a.
　　d. 1853.
　　（signed，） ade. barbin， recorder.
下*书 网

 