《北方与南方》查看《北方与南方》书评和最新更新以及相关书籍推荐请到《北方与南方》专题网址http://www.xiabook.com/waiguo/7730/ 
  



第1章 CHAPTER I \"HASTE TO THE WEDDING\" (1)


　　\"wooed and married and a\".\"
　　\"edith!\" said margaret, gently, \"edith!\"
　　but, as margaret half suspected, edith had fallen asleep. she lay curledup on the sofa in the back drawing-room in harley street, looking verylovely in her white muslin and blue ribbons. if titania had ever beendressed in white muslin and blue ribbons, and had fallen asleep on acrimson damask sofa in a back drawing-room, edith might have beentaken for her. margaret was struck afresh by her cousin s beauty. theyhad grown up together from childhood, and all along edith had beenremarked upon by every one, except margaret, for her prettiness; butmargaret had never thought about it until the last few days, when theprospect of soon losing her companion seemed to give force to everysweet quality and charm which edith possessed. they had been talkingabout wedding dresses, and wedding ceremonies; and captain lennox,and what he had told edith about her future life at corfu, where hisregiment was stationed; and the difficulty of keeping a piano in goodtune (a difficulty which edith seemed to consider as one of the mostformidable that could befall her in her married life), and what gownsshe should want in the visits to scotland, which would immediately
　　succeed her marriage; but the whispered tone had latterly become moredrowsy; and margaret, after a pause of a few minutes, found, as shefancied, that in spite of the buzz in the next room, edith had rolledherself up into a soft ball of muslin and ribbon, and silken curls, andgone off into a peaceful little after-dinner nap.
　　margaret had been on the point of telling her cousin of some of theplans and visions which she entertained as to her future life in thecountry parsonage, where her father and mother lived; and where herbright holidays had always been passed, though for the last ten yearsher aunt shaw\"s house had been considered as her home. but in defaultof a listener, she had to brood over the change in her life silently asheretofore. it was a happy brooding, although tinged with regret atbeing separated for an indefinite time from her gentle aunt and dearcousin. as she thought of the delight of filling the important post ofonly daughter in helstone parsonage, pieces of the conversation out ofthe next room came upon her ears. her aunt shaw was talking to thefive or six ladies who had been dining there, and whose husbands werestill in the dining-room. they were the familiar acquaintances of thehouse; neighbours whom mrs. shaw called friends, because shehappened to dine with them more frequently than with any other people,and because if she or edith wanted anything from them, or they fromher, they did not scruple to make a call at each other\"s houses beforeluncheon. these ladies and their husbands were invited, in theircapacity of friends, to eat a farewell dinner in honour of edith\"sapproaching marriage. edith had rather objected to this arrangement, forcaptain lennox was expected to arrive by a late train this very evening;but, although she was a spoiled child, she was too careless and idle tohave a very strong will of her own, and gave way when she found thather mother had absolutely ordered those extra delicacies of the seasonwhich are always supposed to be efficacious against immoderate griefat farewell dinners. she contented herself by leaning back in her chair,merely playing with the food on her plate, and looking grave andabsent; while all around her were enjoying the mots of mr. grey, thegentleman who always took the bottom of the table at mrs. shaw\"sdinner parties, and asked edith to give them some music in the drawing-room. mr. grey was particularly agreeable over this farewell dinner,and the gentlemen staid down stairs longer than usual. it was very wellthey did--to judge from the fragments of conversation which margaretoverheard.
　　\"i suffered too much myself; not that i was not extremely happy with thepoor dear general, but still disparity of age is a drawback; one that iwas resolved edith should not have to encounter. of course, withoutany maternal partiality, i foresaw that the dear child was likely to marry
　　early; indeed, i had often said that i was sure she would be marriedbefore she was nineteen. i had quite a prophetic feeling when captainlennox\"--and here the voice dropped into a whisper, but margaret couldeasily supply the blank. the course of true love in edith\"s case had runremarkably smooth. mrs. shaw had given way to the presentiment, asshe expressed it; and had rather urged on the marriage, although it wasbelow the expectations which many of edith\"s acquaintances hadformed for her, a young and pretty heiress. but mrs. shaw said that heronly child should marry for love,--and sighed emphatically, as if lovehad not been her motive for marrying the general. mrs. shaw enjoyedthe romance of the present engagement rather more than her daughter.
　　not but that edith was very thoroughly and properly in love; still shewould certainly have preferred a good house in belgravia, to all thepicturesqueness of the life which captain lennox described at corfu.
　　the very parts which made margaret glow as she listened, edithpretended to shiver and shudder at; partly for the pleasure she had inbeing coaxed out of her dislike by her fond lover, and partly becauseanything of a gipsy or make-shift life was really distasteful to her. yethad any one come with a fine house, and a fine estate, and a fine title toboot, edith would still have clung to captain lennox while thetemptation lasted; when it was over, it is possible she might have hadlittle qualms of ill-concealed regret that captain lennox could not haveunited in his person everything that was desirable. in this she was buther mother\"s child; who, after deliberately marrying general shaw withno warmer feeling than respect for his character and establishment, wasconstantly, though quietly, bemoaning her hard lot in being united toone whom she could not love.
　　\"i have spared no expense in her trousseau,\" were the next wordsmargaret heard. \"she has all the beautiful indian shawls and scarfs thegeneral gave to me, but which i shall never wear again.\"
www.56ｗen．ＣＯＭ下 //书 //网



第2章 CHAPTER I \"HASTE TO THE WEDDING\" (2)


　　\"she is a lucky girl,\" replied another voice, which margaret knew to bethat of mrs. gibson, a lady who was taking a double interest in theconversation, from the fact of one of her daughters having been marriedwithin the last few weeks. \"helen had set her heart upon an indianshawl, but really when i found what an extravagant price was asked, iwas obliged to refuse her. she will be quite envious when she hears ofedith having indian shawls. what kind are they? delhi? with the lovelylittle borders?\"
　　margaret heard her aunt\"s voice again, but this time it was as if she hadraised herself up from her half-recumbent position, and were lookinginto the more dimly lighted back drawing-room. \"edith! edith!\" criedshe; and then she sank as if wearied by the exertion. margaret steppedforward.
　　\"edith is asleep, aunt shaw. is it anything i can do?\"
　　all the ladies said \"poor child!\" on receiving this distressing intelligenceabout edith; and the minute lap-dog in mrs. shaw\"s arms began to bark,as if excited by the burst of pity.
　　\"hush, tiny! you naughty little girl! you will waken your mistress. itwas only to ask edith if she would tell newton to bring down hershawls: perhaps you would go, margaret dear?\"
　　margaret went up into the old nursery at the very top of the house,where newton was busy getting up some laces which were required forthe wedding. while newton went (not without a muttered grumbling) toundo the shawls, which had already been exhibited four or five timesthat day, margaret looked round upon the nursery; the first room in thathouse with which she had become familiar nine years ago, when shewas brought, all untamed from the forest, to share the home, the play,and the lessons of her cousin edith. she remembered the dark, dim lookof the london nursery, presided over by an austere and ceremoniousnurse, who was terribly particular about clean hands and torn frocks.
　　she recollected the first tea up there--separate from her father and aunt,who were dining somewhere down below an infinite depth of stairs; forunless she were up in the sky (the child thought), they must be deepdown in the bowels of the earth. at home--before she came to live inharley street--her mother\"s dressing-room had been her nursery; and, asthey kept early hours in the country parsonage, margaret had alwayshad her meals with her father and mother. oh! well did the tall statelygirl of eighteen remember the tears shed with such wild passion of griefby the little girl of nine, as she hid her face under the bed-clothes, inthat first night; and how she was bidden not to cry by the nurse, becauseit would disturb miss edith; and how she had cried as bitterly, but morequietly, till her newly-seen, grand, pretty aunt had come softly upstairswith mr. hale to show him his little sleeping daughter. then the littlemargaret had hushed her sobs, and tried to lie quiet as if asleep, for fearof making her father unhappy by her grief, which she dared not expressbefore her aunt, and which she rather thought it was wrong to feel at allafter the long hoping, and planning, and contriving they had gonethrough at home, before her wardrobe could be arranged so as to suither. grander circumstances, and before papa could leave his parish tocome up to london, even for a few days.
　　now she had got to love the old nursery, though it was but a dismantledplace; and she looked all round, with a kind of cat-like regret, at theidea of leaving it for ever in three days.
　　\"ah newton!\" said she, \"i think we shall all be sorry to leave this dearold room.\"
　　\"indeed, miss, i shan\"t for one. my eyes are not so good as they were,
　　and the light here is so bad that i can\"t see to mend laces except just atthe window, where there\"s always a shocking draught--enough to giveone one\"s death of cold.\"
　　well, i dare say you will have both good light and plenty of warmth atnaples. you must keep as much of your darning as you can till then.
　　thank you, newton, i can take them down--you\"re busy.\"
　　so margaret went down laden with shawls, and snuffing up their spicyeastern smell. her aunt asked her to stand as a sort of lay figure onwhich to display them, as edith was still asleep. no one thought aboutit; but margaret\"s tall, finely made figure, in the black silk dress whichshe was wearing as mourning for some distant relative of her father\"s,set off the long beautiful folds of the gorgeous shawls that would havehalf-smothered edith. margaret stood right under the chandelier, quitesilent and passive, while her aunt adjusted the draperies. occasionally,as she was turned round, she caught a glimpse of herself in the mirrorover the chimney-piece, and smiled at her own appearance there-thefamiliar features in the usual garb of a princess. she touched the shawlsgently as they hung around her, and took a pleasure in their soft feel andtheir brilliant colours, and rather liked to be dressed in such splendour-enjoyingit much as a child would do, with a quiet pleased smile on herlips. just then the door opened, and mr. henry lennox was suddenlyannounced. some of the ladies started back, as if half-ashamed of theirfeminine interest in dress. mrs. shaw held out her hand to the newcomer;margaret stood perfectly still, thinking she might be yet wantedas a sort of block for the shawls; but looking at mr. lennox with abright, amused face, as if sure of his sympathy in her sense of theludicrousness at being thus surprised.




第3章 CHAPTER I \"HASTE TO THE WEDDING\" (3)


　　her aunt was so much absorbed in asking mr. henry lennox--who hadnot been able to come to dinner--all sorts of questions about his brotherthe bridegroom, his sister the bridesmaid (coming with the captainfrom scotland for the occasion), and various other members of thelennox family, that margaret saw she was no more wanted as shawl-bearer, and devoted herself to the amusement of the other visitors,whom her aunt had for the moment forgotten. almost immediately,edith came in from the back drawing-room, winking and blinking hereyes at the stronger light, shaking back her slightly-ruffled curls, andaltogether looking like the sleeping beauty just startled from herdreams. even in her slumber she had instinctively felt that a lennoxwas worth rousing herself for; and she had a multitude of questions toask about dear janet, the future, unseen sister-in-law, for whom sheprofessed so much. affection, that if margaret had not been very proudshe might have almost felt jealous of the mushroom rival. as margaretsank rather more into the background on her aunt\"s joining the
　　conversation, she saw henry lennox directing his look towards avacant seat near her; and she knew perfectly well that as soon as edithreleased him from her questioning, he would take possession of thatchair. she had not been quite sure, from her aunt\"s rather confusedaccount of his engagements, whether he would come that night; it wasalmost a surprise td see him; and now she was sure of a pleasantevening. he liked and disliked pretty nearly the same things that shedid. margaret\"s face was lightened up into an honest, open brightness.
　　by-and-by he came. she received him with a smile which had not atinge of shyness or self-consciousness in it.
　　\"well, i suppose you are all in the depths of business--ladies\" business, imean. very different to my business, which is the real true lawbusiness. playing with shawls is very different work to drawing upsettlements.
　　\"ah, i knew how you would be amused to find us all so occupied inadmiring finery. but really indian shawls are very perfect things of theirkind.\"
　　\"i have no doubt they are. their prices are very perfect, too. nothingwanting.\"
　　the gentlemen came dropping in one by one, and the buzz and noisedeepened in tone.
　　\"this is your last dinner-party, is it not? there are no more beforethursday?\"
　　\"no. i think after this evening we shall feel at rest, which i am sure ihave not done for many weeks; at least, that kind of rest when the handshave nothing more to do, and all the arrangements are complete for anevent which must occupy one\"s head and heart. i shall be glad to havetime to think, and i am sure edith will.\"
　　\"i am not so sure about her; but i can fancy that you will. whenever ihave seen you lately, you have been carried away by a whirlwind ofsome other person\"s making.\"
　　\"yes,\" said margaret, rather sadly, remembering the never-endingcommotion about trifles that had been going on for more than a monthpast: \"i wonder if a marriage must always be preceded by what you calla whirlwind, or whether in some cases there might not rather be a calmand peaceful time just before it.\"
　　\"cinderella\"s godmother ordering the trousseau, the wedding-breakfast,writing the notes of invitation, for instance,\" said mr. lennox, laughing.
　　\"but are all these quite necessary troubles?\" asked margaret, looking upstraight at him for an answer. a sense of indescribable weariness of allthe arrangements for a pretty effect, in which edith had been busied assupreme authority for the last six weeks, oppressed her just now; andshe really wanted some one to help her to a few pleasant, quiet ideas
　　connected with a marriage.
　　\"oh, of course,\" he replied with a change to gravity in his tone. \"thereare forms and ceremonies to be gone through, not so much to satisfyoneself, as to stop the world\"s mouth, without which stoppage therewould be very little satisfaction in life. but how would you have awedding arranged?\"
　　\"oh, i have never thought much about it; only i should like it to be avery fine summer morning; and i should like to walk to church throughthe shade of trees; and not to have so many bridesmaids, and to have nowedding-breakfast. i dare say i am resolving against the very things thathave given me the most trouble just now.\"
　　\"no, i don\"t think you are. the idea of stately simplicity accords wellwith your character.\"
　　margaret did not quite like this speech; she winced away from it more,from remembering former occasions on which he had tried to lead herinto a discussion (in which he took the complimentary part) about herown character and ways of going on. she cut his speech rather short bysaying:
　　\"it is natural for me to think of helstone church, and the walk to it,rather than of driving up to a london church in the middle of a pavedstreet.\"
　　\"tell me about helstone. you have never described it to me. i shouldlike to have some idea of the place you will be living in, when ninety-six harley street will be looking dingy and dirty, and dull, and shut up.
　　is helstone a village, or a town, in the first place?\"
　　\"oh, only a hamlet; i don\"t think i could call it a village at all. there isthe church and a few houses near it on the green--cottages, rather--withroses growing all over them.\"
　　\"and flowering all the year round, especially at christmas--make yourpicture complete,\" said he.
　　\"no,\" replied margaret, somewhat annoyed, \"i am not making a picture. iam trying to describe helstone as it really is. you should not have saidthat.\"
　　\"i am penitent,\" he answered. \"only it really sounded like a village in atale rather than in real life.\"
   www.ｌzuoＷen．Ｃom



第4章 CHAPTER I \"HASTE TO THE WEDDING\" (4)


　　\"and so it is,\" replied margaret, eagerly. \"all the other places in englandthat i have seen seem so hard and prosaic-looking, after the new forest.
　　helstone is like a village in a poem--in one of tennyson\"s poems. but iwon\"t try and describe it any more. you would only laugh at me if i toldyou what i think of it--what it really is.\"
　　\"indeed, i would not. but i see you are going to be very resolved. well,then, tell me that which i should like still better to know:what theparsonage is like.\"
　　\"oh, i can\"t describe my home. it is home, and i can\"t put its charm intowords.\"
　　\"i submit. you are rather severe to-night, margaret.
　　\"how?\" said she, turning her large soft eyes round full upon him. \"i didnot know i was.\"
　　\"why, because i made an unlucky remark, you will neither tell me whathelstone is like, nor will you say anything about your home, though ihave told you how much i want to hear about both, the latter especially.\"
　　\"but indeed i cannot tell you about my own home. i don\"t quite think itis a thing to be talked about, unless you knew it.\"
　　\"well, then\"--pausing for a moment--\"tell me what you do there. hereyou read, or have lessons, or otherwise improve your mind, till themiddle of the day; take a walk before lunch, go a drive with your auntafter, and have some kind of engagement in the evening. there, now fillup your day at helstone. shall you ride, drive, or walk?\"
　　\"walk, decidedly. we have no horse, not even for papa. he walks to thevery extremity of his parish. the walks are so beautiful, it would be ashame to drive--almost a shame to ride.\"
　　\"shall you garden much? that, i believe, is a proper employment foryoung ladies in the country.\"
　　\"i don\"t know. i am afraid i shan\"t like such hard work.\"
　　\"archery parties--pic-nics--race-balls--hunt-balls?\"
　　\"oh no!\" said she, laughing. \"papa\"s living is very small; and even if wewere near such things, i doubt if i should go to them.\"
　　\"i see, you won\"t tell me anything. you will only tell me that you are notgoing to do this and that. before the vacation ends, i think i shall payyou a call, and see what you really do employ yourself in.\"
　　\"i hope you will. then you will see for yourself how beautiful helstoneis. now i must go. edith is sitting down to play, and i just know enoughof music to turn over the leaves for her; and besides, aunt shaw won\"tlike us to talk.\"
　　edith played brilliantly. in the middle of the piece the door half-opened,and edith saw captain lennox hesitating whether to come in. she threwdown her music, and rushed out of the room, leaving margaret standingconfused and blushing to explain to the astonished guests what visionhad shown itself to cause edith\"s sudden flight. captain lennox hadcome earlier than was expected; or was it really so late? they looked attheir watches, were duly shocked, and took their leave.
　　then edith came back, glowing with pleasure, half-shyly, half-proudlyleading in her tall handsome captain. his brother shook hands withhim, and mrs. shaw welcomed him in her gentle kindly way, which hadalways something plaintive in it, arising from the long habit ofconsidering herself a victim to an uncongenial marriage. now that, the
　　general being gone, she had every good of life, with as few drawbacksas possible, she had been rather perplexed to find an anxiety, if not asorrow. she had, however, of late settled upon her own health as asource of apprehension; she had a nervous little cough whenever shethought about it; and some complaisant doctor ordered her just what shedesired,--a winter in italy. mrs. shaw had as strong wishes as mostpeople, but she never liked to do anything from the open andacknowledged motive of her own good will and pleasure; she preferredbeing compelled to gratify herself by some other person\"s command ordesire. she really did persuade herself that she was submitting to somehard external necessity; and thus she was able to moan and complain inher soft manner, all the time she was in reality doing just what sheliked.
　　it was in this way she began to speak of her own journey to captainlennox, who assented, as in duty bound, to all his future mother-in-lawsaid, while his eyes sought edith, who was busying herself inrearranging the tea-table, and ordering up all sorts of good things, inspite of his assurances that he had dined within the last two hours.
　　mr. henry lennox stood leaning against the chimney-piece, amusedwith the family scene. he was close by his handsome brother; he wasthe plain one in a singularly good-looking family; but his face wasintelligent, keen, and mobile; and now and then margaret wonderedwhat it was that he could be thinking about, while he kept silence, butwas evidently observing, with an interest that was slightly sarcastic, allthat edith and she were doing. the sarcastic feeling was called out bymrs. shaw\"s conversation with his brother; it was separate from theinterest which was excited by what he saw. he thought it a pretty sightto see the two cousins so busy in their little arrangements about thetable. edith chose to do most herself. she was in a humour to enjoyshowing her lover how well she could behave as a soldier\"s wife. shefound out that the water in the urn was cold, and ordered up the greatkitchen tea-kettle; the only consequence of which was that when shemet it at the door, and tried to carry it in, it was too heavy for her, andshe came in pouting, with a black mark on her muslin gown, and a littleround white hand indented by the handle, which she took to show tocaptain lennox, just like a hurt child, and, of course, the remedy wasthe same in both cases. margaret\"s quickly-adjusted spirit-lamp was themost efficacious contrivance, though not so like the gypsy-encampmentwhich edith, in some of her moods, chose to consider the nearestresemblance to a barrack-life.
　　after this evening all was bustle till the wedding was over.
wＷw。xiabｏok.com下*书 网



第5章 CHAPTER II ROSES AND THORNS (1)


　　\"by the soft green light in the woody glade,on the banks of moss where thy childhood played;by the household tree, thro\" which thine eyefirst looked in love to the summer sky.\"
　　mrs. hemans.
　　margaret was once more in her morning dress, travelling quietly homewith her father, who had come up to assist at the wedding. her motherhad been detained at home by a multitude of half-reasons, none ofwhich anybody fully understood, except mr. hale, who was perfectlyaware that all his arguments in favour of a grey satin gown, which wasmidway between oldness and newness, had proved unavailing; and that,as he had not the money to equip his wife afresh, from top to toe, shewould not show herself at her only sister\"s only child\"s wedding. if mrs.
　　shaw had guessed at the real reason why mrs. hale did not accompanyher husband, she would have showered down gowns upon her; but itwas nearly twenty years since mrs. shaw had been the poor, pretty missberesford, and she had really forgotten all grievances except that of theunhappiness arising from disparity of age in married life, on which shecould descant by the half-hour. dearest maria had married the man ofher heart, only eight years older than herself, with the sweetest temper,and that blue-black hair one so seldom sees. mr. hale was one of themost delightful preachers she had ever heard, and a perfect model of aparish priest. perhaps it was not quite a logical deduction from all thesepremises, but it was still mrs. shaw\"s characteristic conclusion, as shethought over her sister\"s lot: \"married for love, what can dearest mariahave to wish for in this world?\" mrs. hale, if she spoke truth, mighthave answered with a ready-made list, \"a silver-grey glace silk, a whitechip bonnet, oh! dozens of things for the wedding, and hundreds ofthings for the house.\"
　　margaret only knew that her mother had not found it convenient tocome, and she was not sorry to think that their meeting and greetingwould take place at helstone parsonage, rather than, during theconfusion of the last two or three days, in the house in harley street,where she herself had had to play the part of figaro, and was wantedeverywhere at one and the same time. her mind and body ached nowwith the recollection of all she had done and said within the last forty
　　eight hours. the farewells so hurriedly taken, amongst all the othergood-byes, of those she had lived with so long, oppressed her now witha sad regret for the times that were no more; it did not signify whatthose times had been, they were gone never to return. margaret\"s heartfelt more heavy than she could ever have thought it possible in going toher own dear home, the place and the life she had longed for for years-atthat time of all times for yearning and longing, just before the sharpsenses lose their outlines in sleep. she took her mind away with awrench from the recollection of the past to the bright serenecontemplation of the hopeful future. her eyes began to see, not visionsof what had been, but the sight actually before her; her dear fatherleaning back asleep in the railway carriage. his blue-black hair wasgrey now, and lay thinly over his brows. the bones of his face wereplainly to be seen--too plainly for beauty, if his features had been lessfinely cut; as it was, they had a grace if not a comeliness of their own.
　　the face was in repose; but it was rather rest after weariness, than theserene calm of the countenance of one who led a placid, contented life.
　　margaret was painfully struck by the worn, anxious expression; and shewent back over the open and avowed circumstances of her father\"s life,to find the cause for the lines that spoke so plainly of habitual distressand depression.
　　\"poor frederick!\" thought she, sighing. \"oh! if frederick had but been aclergyman, instead of going into the navy, and being lost to us all! iwish i knew all about it. i never understood it from aunt shaw; i onlyknew he could not come back to england because of that terrible affair.
　　poor dear papa! how sad he looks! i am so glad i am going home, to beat hand to comfort him and mamma.
　　she was ready with a bright smile, in which there was not a trace offatigue, to greet her father when he awakened. he smiled back again,but faintly, as if it were an unusual exertion. his face returned into itslines of habitual anxiety. he had a trick of half-opening his mouth as ifto speak, which constantly unsettled the form of the lips, and gave theface an undecided expression. but he had the same large, soft eyes ashis daughter,--eyes which moved slowly and almost grandly round intheir orbits, and were well veiled by their transparent white eyelids.
　　margaret was more like him than like her mother. sometimes peoplewondered that parents so handsome should have a daughter who was sofar from regularly beautiful; not beautiful at all, was occasionally said.
　　her mouth was wide; no rosebud that could only open just\" enough tolet out a \"yes\" and \"no,\" and \"an\"t please you, sir.\" but the wide mouth wasone soft curve of rich red lips; and the skin, if not white and fair, was ofan ivory smoothness and delicacy. if the look on her face was, ingeneral, too dignified and reserved for one so young, now, talking to
　　her father, it was bright as the morning,--full of dimples, and glancesthat spoke of childish gladness, and boundless hope in the future.
　　it was the latter part of july when margaret returned home. the foresttrees were all one dark, full, dusky green; the fern below them caughtall the slanting sunbeams; the weather was sultry and broodingly still.
wwＷ．7wenxue.com&下&书_ 网



第6章 CHAPTER II ROSES AND THORNS (2)


　　margaret used to tramp along by her father\"s side, crushing down thefern with a cruel glee, as she felt it yield under her light foot, and sendup the fragrance peculiar to it,--out on the broad commons into thewarm scented light, seeing multitudes of wild, free, living creatures,revelling in the sunshine, and the herbs and flowers it called forth. thislife--at least these walks--realised all margaret\"s anticipations. she tooka pride in her forest. its people were her people. she made heartyfriends with them; learned and delighted in using their peculiar words;took up her freedom amongst them; nursed their babies; talked or readwith slow distinctness to their old people; carried dainty messes to theirsick; resolved before long to teach at the school, where her father wentevery day as to an appointed task, but she was continually tempted offto go and see some individual friend--man, woman, or child--in somecottage in the green shade of the forest. her out-of-doors life wasperfect. her in-doors life had its drawbacks. with the healthy shame ofa child, she blamed herself for her keenness of sight, in perceiving thatall was not as it should be there. her mother--her mother always so kindand tender towards her--seemed now and then so much discontentedwith their situation; thought that the bishop strangely neglected hisepiscopal duties, in not giving mr. hale a better living; and almostreproached her husband because he could not bring himself to say thathe wished to leave the parish, and undertake the charge of a larger. hewould sigh aloud as he answered, that if he could do what he ought inlittle helstone, he should be thankful; but every day he was moreoverpowered; the world became more bewildering. at each repeatedurgency of his wife, that he would put himself in the way of seekingsome preferment, margaret saw that her father shrank more and more;and she strove at such times to reconcile her mother to helstone. mrs.
　　hale said that the near neighbourhood of so many trees affected herhealth; and margaret would try to tempt her forth on to the beautiful)broad, upland, sun-streaked, cloud-shadowed common; for she was surethat her mother had accustomed herself too much to an in-doors life,seldom extending her walks beyond the church, the school, and theneighbouring cottages. this did good for a time; but when the autumndrew on, and the weather became more changeable, her mother\"s idea ofthe unhealthiness of the place increased; and she repined even morefrequently that her husband, who was more learned than mr. hume, abetter parish priest than mr. houldsworth, should not have met with the
　　preferment that these two former neighbours of theirs had done.
　　this marring of the peace of home, by long hours of discontent, waswhat margaret was unprepared for. she knew, and had rather revelled inthe idea, that she should have to give up many luxuries, which had onlybeen troubles and trammels to her freedom in harley street. her keenenjoyment of every sensuous pleasure, was balanced finely, if notoverbalanced, by her conscious pride in being able to do without themall, if need were. but the cloud never comes in that quarter of thehorizon from which we watch for it. there had been slight complaintsand passing regrets on her mother\"s part, over some trifle connectedwith helstone, and her father\"s position there, when margaret had beenspending her holidays at home before; but in the general happiness ofthe recollection of those times, she had forgotten the small details whichwere not so pleasant.
　　in the latter half of september, the autumnal rains and storms came on,and margaret was obliged to remain more in the house than she hadhitherto done. helstone was at some distance from any neighbours oftheir own standard of cultivation.
　　\"it is undoubtedly one of the most out-of-the-way places in england,\"
　　said mrs. hale, in one of her plaintive moods. \"i can\"t help regrettingconstantly that papa has really no one to associate with here; he is sothrown away; seeing no one but farmers and labourers from week\"s endto week\"s end. if we only lived at the other side of the parish, it wouldbe something; there we should be almost within walking distance of thestansfields; certainly the gormans would be within a walk.\"
　　\"gormans,\" said margaret. \"are those the gormans who made theirfortunes in trade at southampton? oh! i\"m glad we don\"t visit them. idon\"t like shoppy people. i think we are far better off, knowing onlycottagers and labourers, and people without pretence.\"
　　\"you must not be so fastidious, margaret, dear!\" said her mother,secretly thinking of a young and handsome mr. gorman whom she hadonce met at mr. hume\"s.
　　\"no! i call mine a very comprehensive taste; i like all people whoseoccupations have to do with land; i like soldiers and sailors, and thethree learned professions, as they call them. i\"m sure you don\"t want meto admire butchers and bakers, and candlestick-makers, do you,mamma?\"
　　\"but the gormans were neither butchers nor bakers, but very respectablecoach-builders.\"
　　\"very well. coach-building is a trade all the same, and i think a muchmore useless one than that of butchers or bakers. oh! how tired i usedto be of the drives every day in aunt shaw\"s carriage, and how i longedto walk!\"




第7章 CHAPTER II ROSES AND THORNS (3)


　　and walk margaret did, in spite of the weather. she was so happy outof doors, at her father\"s side, that she almost danced; and with the softviolence of the west wind behind her, as she crossed some heath, sheseemed to be borne onwards, as lightly and easily as the fallen leaf thatwas wafted along by the autumnal breeze. but the evenings were ratherdifficult to fill up agreeably. immediately after tea her father withdrewinto his small library, and she and her mother were left alone. mrs. halehad never cared much for books, and had discouraged her husband, veryearly in their married life, in his desire of reading aloud to her, whileshe worked. at one time they had tried backgammon as a resource; butas mr. hale grew to take an increasing interest in his school and hisparishioners, he found that the interruptions which arose out of theseduties were regarded as hardships by his wife, not to be accepted as thenatural conditions of his profession, but to be regretted and struggledagainst by her as they severally arose. so he withdrew, while thechildren were yet young, into his library, to spend his evenings (if hewere at home), in reading the speculative and metaphysical bookswhich were his delight.
　　when margaret had been here before, she had brought down with her agreat box of books, recommended by masters or governess, and hadfound the summer\"s day all too short to get through the reading she hadto do before her return to town. now there were only the well-boundlittle-read english classics, which were weeded out of her father\"slibrary to fill up the small book-shelves in the drawing-room.
　　thomson\"s seasons, hayley\"s cowper, middleton\"s cicero, were by farthe lightest, newest, and most amusing. the book-shelves did not affordmuch resource. margaret told her mother every particular of her londonlife, to all of which mrs. hale listened with interest, sometimes amusedand questioning, at others a little inclined to compare her sister\"scircumstances of ease and comfort with the narrower means at helstonevicarage. on such evenings margaret was apt to stop talking ratherabruptly, and listen to the drip-drip of the rain upon the leads of thelittle bow-window. once or twice margaret found herself mechanicallycounting the repetition of the monotonous sound, while she wondered ifshe might venture to put a question on a subject very near to her heart,and ask where frederick was now; what he was doing; how long it wassince they had heard from him. but a consciousness that her mother\"sdelicate health, and positive dislike to helstone, all dated from the timeof the mutiny in which frederick had been engaged,--the full account ofwhich margaret had never heard, and which now seemed doomed to beburied in sad oblivion,--made her pause and turn away from the subjecteach time she approached it. when she was with her mother, her fatherseemed the best person to apply to for information; and when with him,
　　she thought that she could speak more easily to her mother. probablythere was nothing much to be heard that was new. in one of the lettersshe had received before leaving harley street, her father had told herthat they had heard from frederick; he was still at rio, and very well inhealth, and sent his best love to her; which was dry bones, but not theliving intelligence she longed for. frederick was always spoken of, inthe rare times when his name was mentioned, as \"poor frederick.\" hisroom was kept exactly as he had left it; and was regularly dusted, andput into order by dixon, mrs. hale\"s maid, who touched no other part ofthe household work, but always remembered the day when she had beenengaged by lady beresford as ladies\" maid to sir john\"s wards, thepretty miss beresfords, the belles of rutlandshire. dixon had alwaysconsidered mr. hale as the blight which had fallen upon her younglady\"s prospects in life. if miss beresford had not been in such a hurryto marry a poor country clergyman, there was no knowing what shemight not have become. but dixon was too loyal to desert her in heraffliction and downfall (alias her married life). she remained with her,and was devoted to her interests; always considering herself as the goodand protecting fairy, whose duty it was to baffle the malignant giant,mr. hale. master frederick had been her favorite and pride; and it waswith a little softening of her dignified look and manner, that she went inweekly to arrange the chamber as carefully as if he might be cominghome that very evening.
　　margaret could not help believing that there had been some lateintelligence of frederick, unknown to her mother, which was makingher father anxious and uneasy. mrs. hale did not seem to perceive anyalteration in her husband\"s looks or ways. his spirits were always tenderand gentle, readily affected by any small piece of intelligenceconcerning the welfare of others. he would be depressed for many daysafter witnessing a death-bed, or hearing of any crime. but now margaretnoticed an absence of mind, as if his thoughts were pre-occupied bysome subject, the oppression of which could not be relieved by anydaily action, such as comforting the survivors, or teaching at the schoolin hope of lessening the evils in the generation to come. mr. hale didnot go out among his parishioners as much as usual; he was more shutup in his study; was anxious for the village postman, whose summonsto the house-hold was a rap on the back-kitchen window-shutter--asignal which at one time had often to be repeated before any one wassufficiently alive to the hour of the day to understand what it was, andattend to him. now mr. hale loitered about the garden if the morningwas fine, and if not, stood dreamily by the study window until thepostman had called, or gone down the lane, giving a half-respectful,half-confidential shake of the head to the parson, who watched him
　　away beyond the sweet-briar hedge, and past the great arbutus, beforehe turned into the room to begin his day\"s work, with all the signs of aheavy heart and an occupied mind.
　　but margaret was at an age when any apprehension, not absolutelybased on a knowledge of facts, is easily banished for a time by a brightsunny day, or some happy outward circumstance. and when thebrilliant fourteen fine days of october came on, her cares were allblown away as lightly as thistledown, and she thought of nothing butthe glories of the forest. the fern-harvest was over, and now that therain was gone, many a deep glade was accessible, into which margarethad only peeped in july and august weather. she had learnt drawingwith edith; and she had sufficiently regretted, during the gloom of thebad weather, her idle revelling in the beauty of the woodlands while ithad yet been fine, to make her determined to sketch what she couldbefore winter fairly set in. accordingly, she was busy preparing herboard one morning, when sarah, the housemaid, threw wide open thedrawing-room door and announced, \"mr. henry lennox.\"




第8章 CHAPTER III \"THE MORE HASTE THE WORSE SPEED\" (1)


　　\"learn to win a lady\"s faithnobly, as the thing is high;bravely, as for life and death-with a loyal gravity.
　　lead her from the festive boards,point her to the starry skies,guard her, by your truthful words,pure from courtship\"s flatteries.
　　\"mrs. browning.
　　\"mr. henry lennox.\" margaret had been thinking of him only a momentbefore, and remembering his inquiry into her probable occupations athome. it was \"parler du soleil et l\"on en voit les rayons;\" and the
　　brightness of the sun came over margaret\"s face as she put down herboard, and went forward to shake hands with him. \"tell mamma, sarah,\"
　　said she. \"mamma and i want to ask you so many questions about edith;i am so much obliged to you for coming.\"
　　\"did not i say that i should?\" asked he, in a lower tone than that in whichshe had spoken.
　　\"but i heard of you so far away in the highlands that i never thoughthampshire could come in.
　　\"oh!\" said he, more lightly, \"our young couple were playing such foolishpranks, running all sorts of risks, climbing this mountain, sailing on thatlake, that i really thought they needed a mentor to take care of them.
　　and indeed they did; they were quite beyond my uncle\"s management,and kept the old gentleman in a panic for sixteen hours out of thetwenty-four. indeed, when i once saw how unfit they were to be trustedalone, i thought it my duty not to leave them till i had seen them safelyembarked at plymouth.\"
　　\"have you been at plymouth? oh! edith never named that. to be sure,she has written in such a hurry lately. did they really sail on tuesday?\"
　　\"really sailed, and relieved me from many responsibilities. edith gaveme all sorts of messages for you. i believe i have a little diminutive notesomewhere; yes, here it is.\"
　　\"oh! thank you,\" exclaimed margaret; and then, half wishing to read italone and unwatched, she made the excuse of going to tell her motheragain (sarah surely had made some mistake) that mr. lennox wasthere.
　　when she had left the room, he began in his scrutinising way to lookabout him. the little drawing-room was looking its best in thestreaming light of the morning sun. the middle window in the bow wasopened, and clustering roses and the scarlet honeysuckle came peepinground the corner; the small lawn was gorgeous with verbenas andgeraniums of all bright colours. but the very brightness outside madethe colours within seem poor and faded. the carpet was far from new;the chintz had been often washed; the whole apartment was smaller andshabbier than he had expected, as back-ground and frame-work formargaret, herself so queenly. he took up one of the books lying on thetable; it was the paradiso of dante, in the proper old italian binding ofwhite vellum and gold; by it lay a dictionary, and some words copiedout in margaret\"s hand-writing. they were a dull list of words, butsomehow he liked looking at them. he put them down with a sigh.
　　\"the living is evidently as small as she said. it seems strange, for theberesfords belong to a good family.\"
　　margaret meanwhile had found her mother. it was one of mrs. hale\"sfitful days, when everything was a difficulty and a hardship; and mr.
　　lennox\"s appearance took this shape, although secretly she feltcomplimented by his thinking it worth while to call.
　　\"it is most unfortunate! we are dining early to-day, and having nothingbut cold meat, in order that the servants may get on with their ironing;and yet, of course, we must ask him to dinner--edith\"s brother-in-lawand all. and your papa is in such low spirits this morning aboutsomething--i don\"t know what. i went into the study just now, and hehad his face on the table, covering it with his hands. i told him i wassure helstone air did not agree with him any more than with me, and hesuddenly lifted up his head, and begged me not to speak a word moreagainst helstone, he could not bear it; if there was one place he lovedon earth it was helstone. but i am sure, for all that, it is the damp andrelaxing air.\"
　　margaret felt as if a thin cold cloud had come between her and the sun.
　　she had listened patiently, in hopes that it might be some relief to hermother to unburden herself; but now it was time to draw her back tomr. lennox.
　　\"papa likes mr. lennox; they got on together famously at the weddingbreakfast. i dare say his coming will do papa good. and never mind thedinner, dear mamma. cold meat will do capitally for a lunch, which isthe light in which mr. lennox will most likely look upon a two o\"clockdinner.\"
　　\"but what are we to do with him till then? it is only half-past ten now.\"
　　\"i\"ll ask him to go out sketching with me. i know he draws, and that willtake him out of your way, mamma. only do come in now; he will thinkit so strange if you don\"t.\"
　　mrs. hale took off her black silk apron, and smoothed her face. shelooked a very pretty lady-like woman, as she greeted mr. lennox withthe cordiality due to one who was almost a relation. he evidentlyexpected to be asked to spend the day, and accepted the invitation witha glad readiness that made mrs. hale wish she could add something tothe cold beef. he was pleased with everything; delighted withmargaret\"s idea of going out sketching together; would not have mr.
　　hale disturbed for the world, with the prospect of so soon meeting himat dinner. margaret brought out her drawing materials for him to choosefrom; and after the paper and brushes had been duly selected, the twoset out in the merriest spirits in the world.
　　\"now, please, just stop here for a minute or two, said margaret. \"theseare the cottages that haunted me so during the rainy fortnight,reproaching me for not having sketched them.\"
　　\"before they tumbled down and were no more seen. truly, if they are tobe sketched--and they are very picturesque--we had better not put it offtill next year. but where shall we sit?\"
　　\"oh! you might have come straight from chambers in the temple,\"
　　instead of having been two months in the highlands! look at thisbeautiful trunk of a tree, which the wood-cutters have left just in theright place for the light. i will put my plaid over it, and it will be aregular forest throne.\"
　　\"with your feet in that puddle for a regal footstool! stay, i will move,and then you can come nearer this way. who lives in these cottages?\"
www．Ｌｚｕｏｗｅｎ．ｃｏｍ  #下!书! 网



第9章 CHAPTER III \"THE MORE HASTE THE WORSE SPEED\" (2)


　　\"they were built by squatters fifty or sixty years ago. one isuninhabited; the foresters are going to take it down, as soon as the oldman who lives in the other is dead, poor old fellow! look--there he is--imust go and speak to him. he is so deaf you will hear all our secrets.\"
　　the old man stood bareheaded in the sun, leaning on his stick at thefront of his cottage. his stiff features relaxed into a slow smile asmargaret went up and spoke to him. mr. lennox hastily introduced thetwo figures into his sketch, and finished up the landscape with asubordinate reference to them--as margaret perceived, when the timecame for getting up, putting away water, and scraps of paper, andexhibiting to each other their sketches. she laughed and blushed mr.
　　lennox watched her countenance.
　　\"now, i call that treacherous,\" said she. \"i little thought you were makingold isaac and me into subjects, when you told me to ask him the historyof these cottages.\"
　　\"it was irresistible. you can\"t know how strong a temptation it was. ihardly dare tell you how much i shall like this sketch.\"
　　he was not quite sure whether she heard this latter sentence before shewent to the brook to wash her palette. she came back rather flushed, butlooking perfectly innocent and unconscious. he was glad of it, for thespeech had slipped from him unawares--a rare thing in the case of aman who premeditated his actions so much as henry lennox.
　　the aspect of home was all right and bright when they reached it. theclouds on her mother\"s brow had cleared off under the propitiousinfluence of a brace of carp, most opportunely presented by aneighbour. mr. hale had returned from his morning\"s round, and wasawaiting his visitor just outside the wicket gate that led into the garden.
　　he looked a complete gentleman in his rather threadbare coat and well-worn hat.margaret was proud of her father; she had always a fresh andtender pride in seeing how favourably he impressed every stranger; stillher quick eye sought over his face and found there traces of someunusual disturbance, which was only put aside, not cleared away.
　　mr. hale asked to look at their sketches.
　　\"i think you have made the tints on the thatch too dark, have you not?\" ashe returned margaret\"s to her, and held out his hand for mr. lennox\"s,which was withheld from him one moment, no more.
　　\"no, papa! i don\"t think i have. the house-leek and stone-crop havegrown so much darker in the rain. is it not like, papa?\" said she, peepingover his shoulder, as he looked at the figures in mr. lennox\"s drawing.
　　\"yes, very like. your figure and way of holding yourself is capital. andit is just poor old isaac\"s stiff way of stooping his long rheumatic back.
　　what is this hanging from the branch of the tree? not a bird\"s nest,surely.\"
　　\"oh no! that is my bonnet. i never can draw with my bonnet on; itmakes my head so hot. i wonder if i could manage figures. there are somany people about here whom i should like to sketch.\"
　　\"i should say that a likeness you very much wish to take you wouldalways succeed in,\" said mr. lennox. \"i have great faith in the power ofwill. i think myself i have succeeded pretty well in yours.\" mr. hale hadpreceded them into the house, while margaret was lingering to plucksome roses, with which to adorn her morning gown for dinner.
　　\"a regular london girl would understand the implied meaning of thatspeech,\" thought mr. lennox. \"she would be up to looking throughevery speech that a young man made her for the arriere-pensee of acompliment. but i don\"t believe margaret,--stay!\" exclaimed he, \"let mehelp you;\" and he gathered for her some velvety cramoisy roses thatwere above her reach, and then dividing the spoil he placed two in hisbutton-hole, and sent her in, pleased and happy, to arrange her flowers.
　　the conversation at dinner flowed on quietly and agreeably. there wereplenty of questions to be asked on both sides--the latest intelligencewhich each could give of mrs. shaw\"s movements in italy to beexchanged; and in the interest of what was said, the unpretendingsimplicity of the parsonage-ways--above all, in the neighbourhood ofmargaret, mr. lennox forgot the little feeling of disappointment withwhich he had at first perceived that she had spoken but the simple truthwhen she had described her father\"s living as very small.
　　\"margaret, my child, you might have gathered us some pears for ourdessert,\" said mr. hale, as the hospitable luxury of a freshly-decantedbottle of wine was placed on the table.
　　mrs. hale was hurried. it seemed as if desserts were impromptu andunusual things at the parsonage; whereas, if mr. hale would only havelooked behind him, he would have seen biscuits and marmalade, andwhat not, all arranged in formal order on the sideboard. but the idea ofpears had taken possession of mr. hale\"s mind, and was not to be got ridof.
　　\"there are a few brown beurres against the south wall which are worthall foreign fruits and preserves. run, margaret, and gather us some.\"
　　\"i propose that we adjourn into the garden, and eat them there\" said mr.
　　lennox. \"nothing is so delicious as to set one\"s teeth into the crisp, juicy
　　fruit, warm and scented by the sun. the worst is, the wasps areimpudent enough to dispute it with one, even at the very crisis andsummit of enjoyment.
　　he rose, as if to follow margaret, who had disappeared through thewindow he only awaited mrs. hale\"s permission. she would rather havewound up the dinner in the proper way, and with all the ceremonieswhich had gone on so smoothly hitherto, especially as she and dixonhad got out the finger-glasses from the store-room on purpose to be ascorrect as became general shaw\"s widow\"s sister, but as mr. hale gotup directly, and prepared to accompany his guest, she could onlysubmit.
　　\"i shall arm myself with a knife,\" said mr. hale: \"the days of eating fruitso primitively as you describe are over with me. i must pare it andquarter it before i can enjoy it.\"
wwＷ．7wenxue.com&下&书_ 网



第10章 CHAPTER III \"THE MORE HASTE THE WORSE SPEED\" (3)


　　margaret made a plate for the pears out of a beetroot leaf, which threwup their brown gold colour admirably. mr. lennox looked more at herthan at the pears; but her father, inclined to cull fastidiously the veryzest and perfection of the hour he had stolen from his anxiety, chosedaintily the ripest fruit, and sat down on the garden bench to enjoy it athis leisure. margaret and mr. lennox strolled along the little terrace-walk under the south wall, where the bees still hummed and workedbusily in their hives.
　　\"what a perfect life you seem to live here! i have always felt rathercontemptuously towards the poets before, with their wishes, \"mine be acot beside a hill,\" and that sort of thing: but now i am afraid that thetruth is, i have been nothing better than a cockney. just now i feel as iftwenty years\" hard study of law would be amply rewarded by one yearof such an exquisite serene life as this--such skies!\" looking up--\"suchcrimson and amber foliage, so perfectly motionless as that!\" pointing tosome of the great forest trees which shut in the garden as if it were anest.
　　\"you must please to remember that our skies are not always as deep ablue as they are now. we have rain, and our leaves do fall, and getsodden: though i think helstone is about as perfect a place as any in theworld. recollect how you rather scorned my description of it oneevening in harley street: \"a village in a tale.\"
　　\"scorned, margaret that is rather a hard word.\"
　　\"perhaps it is. only i know i should have liked to have talked to you ofwhat i was very full at the time, and you--what must i call it, then?-spokedisrespectfully of helstone as a mere village in a tale.\"
　　\"i will never do so again,\" said he, warmly. they turned the corner of thewalk.
　　\"i could almost wish, margaret----\" he stopped and hesitated. it was so
　　unusual for the fluent lawyer to hesitate that margaret looked up at him,in a little state of questioning wonder; but in an instant--from whatabout him she could not tell--she wished herself back with her mother-herfather--anywhere away from him, for she was sure he was going tosay something to which she should not know what to reply. in anothermoment the strong pride that was in her came to conquer her suddenagitation, which she hoped he had not perceived. of course she couldanswer, and answer the right thing; and it was poor and despicable ofher to shrink from hearing any speech, as if she had not power to put anend to it with her high maidenly dignity.
　　\"margaret,\" said he, taking her by surprise, and getting suddenpossession of her hand, so that she was forced to stand still and listen,despising herself for the fluttering at her heart all the time; \"margaret, iwish you did not like helstone so much--did not seem so perfectly calmand happy here. i have been hoping for these three months past to findyou regretting london--and london friends, a little--enough to makeyou listen more kindly\" (for she was quietly, but firmly, striving toextricate her hand from his grasp) \"to one who has not much to offer, itis true--nothing but prospects in the future--but who does love you,margaret, almost in spite of himself. margaret, have i startled you toomuch? speak!\" for he saw her lips quivering almost as if she weregoing to cry. she made a strong effort to be calm; she would not speaktill she had succeeded in mastering her voice, and then she said:
　　\"i was startled. i did not know that you cared for me in that way. i havealways thought of you as a friend; and, please, i would rather go onthinking of you so. i don\"t like to be spoken to as you have been doing. icannot answer you as you want me to do, and yet i should feel so sorryif i vexed you.\"
　　\"margaret,\" said he, looking into her eyes, which met his with their open,straight look, expressive of the utmost good faith and reluctance to givepain, \"do you\"--he was going to say--\"love any one else?\" but it seemedas if this question would be an insult to the pure serenity of those eyes.
　　\"forgive me i have been too abrupt. i am punished. only let me hope.
　　give me the poor comfort of telling me you have never seen any onewhom you could----\" again a pause. he could not end his sentence.
　　margaret reproached herself acutely as the cause of his distress.
www.xiabook.com.  



第11章 CHAPTER III \"THE MORE HASTE THE WORSE SPEED\" (4)


　　\"ah! if you had but never got this fancy into your head! it was such apleasure to think of you as a friend.\"
　　\"but i may hope, may i not, margaret, that some time you will think ofme as a lover? not yet, i see--there is no hurry--but some time----\"
　　she was silent for a minute or two, trying to discover the truth as it wasin her own heart, before replying; then she said:
　　\"i have never thought of--you, but as a friend. i like to think of you so;
　　but i am sure i could never think of you as anything else. pray, let usboth forget that all this\" (\"disagreeable,\" she was going to say, butstopped short) \"conversation has taken place.\"
　　he paused before he replied. then, in his habitual coldness of tone, heanswered:
　　\"of course, as your feelings are so decided, and as this conversation hasbeen so evidently unpleasant to you, it had better not be remembered.
　　that is all very fine in theory, that plan of forgetting whatever ispainful, but it will be somewhat difficult for me, at least, to carry it intoexecution.\"
　　\"you are vexed,\" said she, sadly; \"yet how can i help it?\"
　　she looked so truly grieved as she said this, that he struggled for amoment with his real disappointment, and then answered morecheerfully, but still with a little hardness in his tone:
　　\"you should make allowances for the mortification, not only of a lover,margaret, but of a man not given to romance in general--prudent,worldly, as some people call me--who has been carried out of his usualhabits by the force of a passion--well, we will say no more of that; butin the one outlet which he has formed for the deeper and better feelingsof his nature, he meets with rejection and repulse. i shall have toconsole myself with scorning my own folly. a struggling barrister tothink of matrimony!\"
　　margaret could not answer this. the whole tone of it annoyed her. itseemed to touch on and call out all the points of difference which hadoften repelled her in him; while yet he was the pleasantest man, themost sympathising friend, the person of all others who understood herbest in harley street. she felt a tinge of contempt mingle itself with herpain at having refused him. her beautiful lip curled in a slight disdain.
　　it was well that, having made the round of the garden, they camesuddenly upon mr. hale, whose whereabouts had been quite forgottenby them. he had not yet finished the pear, which he had delicatelypeeled in one long strip of silver-paper thinness, and which he wasenjoying in a deliberate manner. it was like the story of the easternking, who dipped his head into a basin of water, at the magician\"scommand, and ere he instantly took it out went through the experienceof a lifetime. i margaret felt stunned, and unable to recover her self-possession enough to join in the trivial conversation that ensuedbetween her father and mr. lennox. she was grave, and little disposedto speak; full of wonder when mr. lennox would go, and allow her torelax into thought on the events of the last quarter of an hour. he wasalmost as anxious to take his departure as she was for him to leave; buta few minutes light and careless talking, carried on at whatever effort,was a sacrifice which he owed to his mortified vanity, or his self
　　respect. he glanced from time to time at her sad and pensive face.
　　\"i am not so indifferent to her as she believes,\" thought he to himself. \"ido not give up hope.\"
　　before a quarter of an hour was over, he had fallen into a way ofconversing with quiet sarcasm; speaking of life in london and life inthe country, as if he were conscious of his second mocking self, andafraid of his own satire. mr. hale was puzzled. his visitor was adifferent man to what he had seen him before at the wedding-breakfast,and at dinner to-day; a lighter, cleverer, more worldly man, and, assuch, dissonant to mr. hale. it was a relief to all three when mr. lennoxsaid that he must go directly if he meant to catch the five o\"clock train.
　　they proceeded to the house to find mrs. hale, and wish her good-bye.
　　at the last moment, henry lennox\"s real self broke through the crust.
　　\"margaret, don\"t despise me; i have a heart, notwithstanding all thisgood-for-nothing way of talking. as a proof of it, i believe i love youmore than ever--if i do not hate you--for the disdain with which youhave listened to me during this last half-hour. good-bye, margaret-margaret!\"




第12章 CHAPTER IV DOUBTS AND DIFFICULTIES (1)


　　\"cast me upon some naked shore,where i may traceonly the print of some sad wrack,if thou be there, though the seas roare,i shall no gentler calm implore.\"
　　habington.
　　he was gone. the house was shut up for the evening. no more deepblue skies or crimson and amber tints. margaret went up to dress for theearly tea, finding dixon in a pretty temper from the interruption which avisitor had naturally occasioned on a busy day. she showed it bybrushing away viciously at margaret\"s hair, under pretence of being in agreat hurry to go to mrs. hale. yet, after all, margaret had to wait along time in the drawing-room before her mother came down. she satby herself at the fire, with unlighted candles on the table behind her,
　　thinking over the day, the happy walk, happy sketching, cheerfulpleasant dinner, and the uncomfortable, miserable walk in the garden.
　　how different men were to women! here was she disturbed andunhappy, because her instinct had made anything but a refusalimpossible; while he, not many minutes after he had met with arejection of what ought to have been the deepest, holiest proposal of hislife, could speak as if briefs, success, and all its superficialconsequences of a good house, clever and agreeable society, were thesole avowed objects of his desires. oh dear! how she could have lovedhim if he had but been different, with a difference which she felt, onreflection, to be one that went low--deep down. then she took it intoher head that, after all, his lightness might be but assumed, to cover abitterness of disappointment which would have been stamped on herown heart if she had loved and been rejected.
　　her mother came into the room before this whirl of thoughts wasadjusted into anything like order. margaret had to shake off therecollections of what had been done and said through the day, and turna sympathising listener to the account of how dixon had complainedthat the ironing-blanket had been burnt again; and how susan lightfoothad been seen with artificial flowers in her bonnet, thereby givingevidence of a vain and giddy character. mr. hale sipped his tea inabstracted silence; margaret had the responses all to herself. shewondered how her father and mother could be so forgetful, soregardless of their companion through the day, as never to mention hisname. she forgot that he had not made them an offer.
　　after tea mr. hale got up, and stood with his elbow on the chimney-piece, leaning his head on his hand, musing over something, and fromtime to time sighing deeply. mrs. hale went out to consult with dixonabout some winter clothing for the poor. margaret was preparing hermother\"s worsted work, and rather shrinking from the thought of thelong evening, and wishing bed-time were come that she might go overthe events of the day again.
　　\"margaret!\" said mr. hale, at last, in a sort of sudden desperate way, thatmade her start. \"is that tapestry thing of immediate consequence? imean, can you leave it and come into my study? i want to speak to youabout something very serious to us all.\"
　　\"very serious to us all.\" mr. lennox had never had the opportunity ofhaving any private conversation with her father after her refusal, or elsethat would indeed be a very serious affair. in the first place, margaretfelt guilty and ashamed of having grown so much into a woman as to bethought of in marriage; and secondly, she did not know if her fathermight not be displeased that she had taken upon herself to decline mr.
　　lennox\"s proposal. but she soon felt it was not about anything, which
　　having only lately and suddenly occurred, could have given rise to anycomplicated thoughts, that her father wished to speak to her. he madeher take a chair by him; he stirred the fire, snuffed the candles, andsighed once or twice before he could make up his mind to say--and itcame out with a jerk after all--\"margaret! i am going to leave helstone.\"
　　\"leave helstone, papa! but why?\"
　　mr. hale did not answer for a minute or two. he played with somepapers on the table in a nervous and confused manner, opening his lipsto speak several times, but closing them again without having thecourage to utter a word. margaret could not bear the sight of thesuspense, which was even more distressing to her father than to herself.
　　\"but why, dear papa? do tell me!\"
　　he looked up at her suddenly, and then said with a slow and enforcedcalmness:
　　\"because i must no longer be a minister in the church of england.\"
　　margaret had imagined nothing less than that some of the prefermentswhich her mother so much desired had befallen her father at last-somethingthat would force him to leave beautiful, beloved helstone,and perhaps compel him to go and live in some of the stately and silentcloses which margaret had seen from time to time in cathedral towns.
　　they were grand and imposing places, but if, to go there, it wasnecessary to leave helstone as a home for ever, that would have been asad, long, lingering pain. but nothing to the shock she received frommr. hale\"s last speech. what could he mean? it was all the worse forbeing so mysterious. the aspect of piteous distress on his face, almostas imploring a merciful and kind judgment from his child, gave her asudden sickening. could he have become implicated in anythingfrederick had done? frederick was an outlaw. had her father, out of anatural love for his son, connived at any-\"
　　oh! what is it? do speak, papa! tell me all! why can you no longer be aclergyman? surely, if the bishop were told all we know aboutfrederick, and the hard, unjust--\"
　　\"it is nothing about frederick; the bishop would have nothing to do withthat. it is all myself. margaret, i will tell you about it. i will answer anyquestions this once, but after to-night let us never speak of it again. ican meet the consequences of my painful, miserable doubts; but it is aneffort beyond me to speak of what has caused me so much suffering.\"
　　\"doubts, papa! doubts as to religion?\" asked margaret, more shockedthan ever.
　　\"no! not doubts as to religion; not the slightest injury to that.\"
　　he paused. margaret sighed, as if standing on the verge of some newhorror. he began again, speaking rapidly, as if to get over a set task:
  



第13章 CHAPTER IV DOUBTS AND DIFFICULTIES (2)


　　\"you could not understand it all, if i told you--my anxiety, for years
　　past, to know whether i had any right to hold my living--my efforts toquench my smouldering doubts by the authority of the church. oh!
　　margaret, how i love the holy church from which i am to be shut out!\"
　　he could not go on for a moment or two. margaret could not tell whatto say; it seemed to her as terribly mysterious as if her father were aboutto turn mahometan.
　　\"i have been reading to-day of the two thousand who were ejected fromtheir churches,\"--continued mr. hale, smiling faintly,--\"trying to stealsome of their bravery; but it is of no use--no use--i cannot help feelingit acutely.\"
　　\"but, papa, have you well considered? oh! it seems so terrible, soshocking,\" said margaret, suddenly bursting into tears. the one staidfoundation of her home, of her idea of her beloved father, seemedreeling and rocking. what could she say? what was to be done? thesight of her distress made mr. hale nerve himself, in order to try andcomfort her. he swallowed down the dry choking sobs which had beenheaving up from his heart hitherto, and going to his bookcase he tookdown a volume, which he had often been reading lately, and fromwhich he thought he had derived strength to enter upon the course inwhich he was now embarked.
　　\"listen, dear margaret,\" said he, putting one arm round her waist. shetook his hand in hers and grasped it tight, but she could not lift up herhead; nor indeed could she attend to what he read, so great was herinternal agitation.
　　\"this is the soliloquy of one who was once a clergyman in a countryparish, like me; it was written by a mr. oldfield, minister of carsington,in derbyshire, a hundred and sixty years ago, or more. his trials areover. he fought the good fight.\" these last two sentences he spoke low,as if to himself. then he read aloud,-\"
　　when thou canst no longer continue in thy work without dishonour togod, discredit to religion, foregoing thy integrity, woundingconscience, spoiling thy peace, and hazarding the loss of thy salvation;in a word, when the conditions upon which thou must continue (if thouwilt continue) in thy employments are sinful, and unwarranted by theword of god, thou mayest, yea, thou must believe that god will turn thyvery silence, suspension, deprivation, and laying aside, to his glory,and the advancement of the gospel\"s interest. when god will not usethee in one kind, yet he will in another. a soul that desires to serve andhonour him shall never want opportunity to do it; nor must thou solimit the holy one of israel as to think he hath but one way in whichhe can glorify himself by thee. he can do it by thy silence as well asby thy preaching; thy laying aside as well as thy continuance in thywork. it is not pretence of doing god the greatest service, or performing
　　the weightiest duty, that will excuse the least sin, though that sincapacitated or gave us the opportunity for doing that duty. thou wilthave little thanks, 0 my soul! if, when thou art charged with corruptinggod\"s worship, falsifying thy vows, thou pretendest a necessity for it inorder to a continuance in the ministry.
　　as he read this, and glanced at much more which he did not read, hegained resolution for himself, and felt as if he too could be brave andfirm in doing what he believed to be right; but as he ceased he heardmargaret\"s low convulsive sob; and his courage sank down under thekeen sense of suffering.
　　\"margaret, dear!\" said he, drawing her closer, \"think of the early martyrs;think of the thousands who have suffered.\"
　　\"but, father,\" said she, suddenly lifting up her flushed, tear-wet face, \"theearly martyrs suffered for the truth, while you--oh! dear, dear papa!\"
　　\"i suffer for conscience\" sake, my child,\" said he, with a dignity that wasonly tremulous from the acute sensitiveness of his character; \"i must dowhat my conscience bids. i have borne long with self-reproach thatwould have roused any mind less torpid and cowardly than mine.\" heshook his head as he went on. \"your poor mother\"s fond wish, gratifiedat last in the mocking way in which over-fond wishes are too oftenfulfilled--sodom apples as they are--has brought on this crisis, forwhich i ought to be, and i hope i am thankful. it is not a month sincethe bishop offered me another living; if i had accepted it, i should havehad to make a fresh declaration of conformity to the liturgy at myinstitution. margaret, i tried to do it; i tried to content myself withsimply refusing the additional preferment, and stopping quietly here,-stranglingmy conscience now, as i had strained it before. god forgiveme!\"
　　he rose and walked up and down the room, speaking low words of self-reproach and humiliation, of which margaret was thankful to hear butfew. at last he said,\"margaret, i return to the old sad burden we must leave helstone.\"
　　\"yes! i see. but when?\"
　　\"i have written to the bishop--i dare say i have told you so, but i forgetthings just now,\" said mr. hale, collapsing into his depressed manner assoon as he came to talk of hard matter-of-fact details, \"informing him ofmy intention to resign this vicarage. he has been most kind; he has usedarguments and expostulations, all in vain--in vain. they are but what ihave tried upon myself, without avail. i shall have to take my deed ofresignation, and wait upon the bishop myself, to bid him farewell. thatwill be a trial, but worse, far worse, will be the parting from my dearpeople. there is a curate appointed to read prayers--a mr. brown. hewill come to stay with us to-morrow. next sunday i preach my farewell
　　sermon.\"
　　was it to be so sudden then? thought margaret; and yet perhaps it wasas well. lingering would only add stings to the pain; it was better to bestunned into numbness by hearing of all these arrangements, whichseemed to be nearly completed before she had been told. \"what doesmamma say?\" asked she, with a deep sigh.
　　to her surprise, her father began to walk about again before heanswered. at length he stopped and replied:




第14章 CHAPTER IV DOUBTS AND DIFFICULTIES (3)


　　\"margaret, i am a poor coward after all. i cannot bear to give pain. iknow so well your mother\"s married life has not been all she hoped--allshe had a right to expect--and this will be such a blow to her, that i havenever had the heart, the power to tell her. she must be told though,now,\" said he, looking wistfully at his daughter. margaret was almostoverpowered with the idea that her mother knew nothing of it all, andyet the affair was so far advanced!
　　\"yes, indeed she must,\" said margaret. \"perhaps, after all, she may not-ohyes! she will, she must be shocked\"--as the force of the blowreturned upon herself in trying to realise how another would take it.
　　\"where are we to go to?\" said she at last, struck with a fresh wonder asto their future plans, if plans indeed her father had.
　　\"to milton-northern,\" he answered, with a dull indifference, for he hadperceived that, although his daughter\"s love had made her cling to him,and for a moment strive to soothe him with her love, yet the keenness ofthe pain was as fresh as ever in her mind.
　　\"milton-northern! the manufacturing town in darkshire?\"
　　\"yes,\" said he, in the same despondent, indifferent way.
　　\"why there, papa?\" asked she.
　　\"because there i can earn bread for my family. because i know no onethere, and no one knows helstone, or can ever talk to me about it.\"
　　\"bread for your family! i thought you and mamma had\"--and then shestopped, checking her natural interest regarding their future life, as shesaw the gathering gloom on her father\"s brow. but he, with his quickintuitive sympathy, read in her face, as in a mirror, the reflections of hisown moody depression, and turned it off with an effort.
　　\"you shall be told all, margaret. only help me to tell your mother. ithink i could do anything but that: the idea of her distress turns me sickwith dread. if i tell you all, perhaps you could break it to her tomorrow.
　　i am going out for the day, to bid farmer dobson and the poorpeople on bracy common good-bye. would you dislike breaking it toher very much, margaret?\"margaret did dislike it, did shrink from itmore than from anything she had ever had to do in her life before. shecould not speak, all at once. her father said, \"you dislike it very much,don\"t you,
　　margaret?\" then she conquered herself, and said, with a bright stronglook on her face:
　　\"it is a painful thing, but it must be done, and i will do it as well as everi can. you must have many painful things to do.\"
　　mr. hale shook his head despondingly: he pressed her hand in token ofgratitude. margaret was nearly upset again into a burst of crying. toturn her thoughts, she said: \"now tell me, papa, what our plans are. youand mamma have some money, independent of the income from theliving, have not you? aunt shaw has, i know.\"
　　\"yes. i suppose we have about a hundred and seventy pounds a year ofour own. seventy of that has always gone to frederick, since he hasbeen abroad. i don\"t know if he wants it all,\" he continued in a hesitatingmanner. \"he must have some pay for serving with the spanish army.\"
　　\"frederick must not suffer,\" said margaret, decidedly; \"in a foreigncountry; so unjustly treated by his own. a hundred is left could notyou, and i, and mamma live on a hundred a year in some very cheap-veryquiet part of england? oh! i think we could.\"
　　\"no!\" said mr. hale. \"that would not answer. i must do something. imust make myself busy, to keep off morbid thoughts. besides, in acountry parish i should be so painfully reminded of helstone, and myduties here. i could not bear it, margaret. and a hundred a year wouldgo a very little way, after the necessary wants of housekeeping are met,towards providing your mother with all the comforts she has beenaccustomed to, and ought to have. no: we must go to milton. that issettled. i can always decide better by myself, and not influenced bythose whom i love,\" said he, as a half apology for having arranged somuch before he had told any one of his family of his intentions. \"icannot stand objections. they make me so undecided.\"
　　margaret resolved to keep silence. after all, what did it signify wherethey went, compared to the one terrible change?
　　mr. hale continued: \"a few months ago, when my misery of doubtbecame more than i could bear without speaking, i wrote to mr. bell-youremember mr. bell, margaret?\"
　　\"no; i never saw him, i think. but i know who he is. frederick\"sgodfather--your old tutor at oxford, don\"t you mean?\"




第15章 CHAPTER IV DOUBTS AND DIFFICULTIES (4)


　　\"yes. he is a fellow of plymouth college there. he is a native of milton-northern, i believe. at any rate, he has property there, which has verymuch increased in value since milton has become such a largemanufacturing town. well, i had reason to suspect--to imagine--i hadbetter say nothing about it, however. but i felt sure of sympathy frommr. bell. i don\"t know that he gave me much strength. he has lived aneasy life in his college all his days. but he has been as kind as can be.
　　and it is owing to him we are going to milton.\"
　　\"how?\" said margaret.
　　\"why he has tenants, and houses, and mills there; so, though he dislikesthe place--too bustling for one of his habits--he is obliged to keep upsome sort of connection; and he tells me that he hears there is a goodopening for a private tutor there.\"
　　\"a private tutor!\" said margaret, looking scornful: \"what in the world domanufacturers want with the classics, or literature, or theaccomplishments of a gentleman?\"
　　\"oh,\" said her father, \"some of them really seem to be fine fellows,conscious of their own deficiencies, which is more than many a man atoxford is. some want resolutely to learn, though they have come toman\"s estate. some want their children to be better instructed than theythemselves have been. at any rate, there is an opening, as i have said,for a private tutor. mr. bell has recommended me to a mr. thornton, atenant of his, and a very intelligent man, as far as i can judge from hisletters. and in milton, margaret, i shall find a busy life, if not a happyone, and people and scenes so different that i shall never be reminded ofhelstone.\"
　　there was the secret motive, as margaret knew from her own feelings.
　　it would be different. discordant as it was--with almost a detestation forall she had ever heard of the north of england, the manufacturers, thepeople, the wild and bleak country--there was this one recommendation-it would be different from helstone, and could never remind them ofthat beloved place.
　　\"when do we go?\" asked margaret, after a short silence.
　　\"i do not know exactly. i wanted to talk it over with you. you see, yourmother knows nothing about it yet: but i think, in a fortnight;--after mydeed of resignation is sent in, i shall have no right to remain.
　　margaret was almost stunned.
　　\"in a fortnight!\"
　　\"no--no, not exactly to a day. nothing is fixed,\" said her father, withanxious hesitation, as he noticed the filmy sorrow that came over hereyes, and the sudden change in her complexion. but she recoveredherself immediately.
　　\"yes, papa, it had better be fixed soon and decidedly, as you say. onlymamma to know nothing about it! it is that that is the great perplexity.\"
　　\"poor maria!\" replied mr. hale, tenderly. \"poor, poor maria! oh, if iwere not married--if i were but myself in the world, how easy it wouldbe! as it is--margaret, i dare not tell her!\"
　　\"no,\" said margaret, sadly, \"i will do it. give me till to-morrow eveningto choose my time oh, papa,\" cried she, with sudden passionateentreaty, \"say--tell me it is a night-mare--a horrid dream--not the realwaking truth! you cannot mean that you are really going to leave the
　　church--to give up helstone--to be for ever separate from me, frommamma--led away by some delusion--some temptation! you do notreally mean it!\"
　　mr. hale sat in rigid stillness while she spoke.
　　then he looked her in the face, and said in a slow, hoarse, measuredway--\"i do mean it, margaret. you must not deceive yourself intodoubting the reality of my words--my fixed intention and resolve.\" helooked at her in the same steady, stony manner, for some moments afterhe had done speaking. she, too, gazed back with pleading eyes beforeshe would believe that it was irrevocable. then she arose and went,without another word or look, towards the door. as her fingers were onthe handle he called her back. he was standing by the fireplace, shrunkand stooping; but as she came near he drew himself up to his fullheight, and, placing his hands on her head, he said, solemnly:
　　\"the blessing of god be upon thee, my child!\"
　　\"and may he restore you to his church,\" responded she, out of thefulness of her heart. the next moment she feared lest this answer to hisblessing might be irreverent, wrong--might hurt him as coming from hisdaughter, and she threw her arms round his neck. he held her to him fora minute or two. she heard him murmur to himself, \"the martyrs andconfessors had even more pain to bear--i will not shrink.\"
　　they were startled by hearing mrs. hale inquiring for her daughter.
　　they started asunder in the full consciousness of all that was beforethem. mr. hale hurriedly said--\"go, margaret, go. i shall be out all tomorrow.
　　before night you will have told your mother.\"
　　\"yes,\" she replied, and she returned to the drawing-room in a stunnedand dizzy state.




第16章 CHAPTER V DECISION (1)


　　\"i ask thee for a thoughtful love,through constant watching wise,to meet the glad with joyful smiles,and to wipe the weeping eyes;and a heart at leisure from itself
　　to soothe and sympathise.\"
　　anon.
　　margaret made a good listener to all her mother\"s little plans for addingsome small comforts to the lot of the poorer parishioners. she could nothelp listening, though each new project was a stab to her heart. by thetime the frost had set in, they should be far away from helstone. oldsimon\"s rheumatism might be bad and his eyesight worse; there wouldbe no one to go and read to him, and comfort him with little porringersof broth and good red flannel: or if there was, it would be a stranger,and the old man would watch in vain for her. mary domville\"s littlecrippled boy would crawl in vain to the door and look for her comingthrough the forest. these poor friends would never understand why shehad forsaken them; and there were many others besides. \"papa hasalways spent the income he derived from his living in the parish. i am,perhaps, encroaching upon the next dues, but the winter is likely to besevere, and our poor old people must be helped.\"
　　\"oh, mamma, let us do all we can,\" said margaret eagerly, not seeing theprudential side of the question, only grasping at the idea that they wererendering such help for the last time; \"we may not be here long.\"
　　\"do you feel ill, my darling?\" asked mrs. hale, anxiously,misunderstanding margaret\"s hint of the uncertainty of their stay athelstone. \"you look pale and tired. it is this soft, damp, unhealthy air.\"
　　\"no--no, mamma, it is not that: it is delicious air. it smells of thefreshest, purest fragrance, after the smokiness of harley street. but i amtired: it surely must be near bedtime.\"
　　\"not far off--it is half-past nine. you had better go to bed at dear. askdixon for some gruel. i will come and see you as soon as you are inbed. i am afraid you have taken cold; or the bad air from some of thestagnant ponds--\"
　　\"oh, mamma,\" said margaret, faintly smiling as she kissed her mother, \"iam quite well--don\"t alarm yourself about me; i am only tired.\"
　　margaret went upstairs. to soothe her mother\"s anxiety she submitted toa basin of gruel. she was lying languidly in bed when mrs. hale cameup to make some last inquiries and kiss her before going to her ownroom for the night. but the instant she heard her mother\"s door locked,she sprang out of bed, and throwing her dressing-gown on, she began topace up and down the room, until the creaking of one of the boardsreminded her that she must make no noise. she went and curled herselfup on the window-seat in the small, deeply-recessed window. thatmorning when she had looked out, her heart had danced at seeing thebright clear lights on the church tower, which foretold a fine and sunnyday. this evening--sixteen hours at most had past by--she sat down, toofull of sorrow to cry, but with a dull cold pain, which seemed to have
　　pressed the youth and buoyancy out of her heart, never to return. mr.
　　henry lennox\"s visit--his offer--was like a dream, a thing beside heractual life. the hard reality was, that her father had so admittedtempting doubts into his mind as to become a schismatic--an outcast; allthe changes consequent upon this grouped themselves around that onegreat blighting fact.
　　she looked out upon the dark-gray lines of the church tower, square andstraight in the centre of the view, cutting against the deep bluetransparent depths beyond, into which she gazed, and felt that she mightgaze for ever, seeing at every moment some farther distance, and yet nosign of god! it seemed to her at the moment, as if the earth was moreutterly desolate than if girt in by an iron dome, behind which theremight be the ineffaceable peace and glory of the almighty: those never-ending depths of space, in their still serenity, were more mocking to herthan any material bounds could be--shutting in the cries of earth\"ssufferers, which now might ascend into that infinite splendour ofvastness and be lost--lost for ever, before they reached his throne. inthis mood her father came in unheard. the moonlight was strongenough to let him see his daughter in her unusual place and attitude. hecame to her and touched her shoulder before she was aware that he wasthere.
　　\"margaret, i heard you were up. i could not help coming in to ask you topray with me--to say the lord\"s prayer; that will do good to both of us.\"
　　mr. hale and margaret knelt by the window-seat--he looking up, shebowed down in humble shame. god was there, close around them,hearing her father\"s whispered words. her father might be a heretic; buthad not she, in her despairing doubts not five minutes before, shownherself a far more utter sceptic? she spoke not a word, but stole to bedafter her father had left her, like a child ashamed of its fault. if theworld was full of perplexing problems she would trust, and only ask tosee the one step needful for the hour. mr. lennox--his visit, hisproposal--the remembrance of which had been so rudely pushed asideby the subsequent events of the day--haunted her dreams that night. hewas climbing up some tree of fabulous height to reach the branchwhereon was slung her bonnet: he was falling, and she was strugglingto save him, but held back by some invisible powerful hand. he wasdead. and yet, with a shifting of the scene, she was once more in theharley street drawing-room, talking to him as of old, and still with aconsciousness all the time that she had seen him killed by that terriblefall.
　　miserable, unresting night! ill preparation for the coming day! sheawoke with a start, unrefreshed, and conscious of some reality worseeven than her feverish dreams. it all came back upon her; not merely the
　　sorrow, but the terrible discord in the sorrow. where, to what distanceapart, had her father wandered, led by doubts which were to hertemptations of the evil one? she longed to ask, and yet would not haveheard for all the world.
　　the fine crisp morning made her mother feel particularly well andhappy at breakfast-time. she talked on, planning village kindnesses,unheeding the silence of her husband and the monosyllabic answers ofmargaret. before the things were cleared away, mr. hale got up; heleaned one hand on the table, as if to support himself:
wＷw。xiabｏok.com   http://www.xiaboＯk.com



第17章 CHAPTER V DECISION (2)


　　\"i shall not be at home till evening. i am going to bracy common, andwill ask farmer dobson to give me something for dinner. i shall beback to tea at seven.\"
　　he did not look at either of them, but margaret knew what he meant. byseven the announcement must be made to her mother. mr. hale wouldhave delayed making it till half-past six, but margaret was of differentstuff. she could not bear the impending weight on her mind all the daylong: better get the worst over; the day would be too short to comforther mother. but while she stood by the window, thinking how to begin,and waiting for the servant to have left the room, her mother had goneup-stairs to put on her things to go to the school. she came down readyequipped, in a brisker mood than usual.
　　\"mother, come round the garden with me this morning; just one turn,\"
　　said margaret, putting her arm round mrs. hale\"s waist.
　　they passed through the open window. mrs. hale spoke--saidsomething--margaret could not tell what. her eye caught on a beeentering a deep-belled flower: when that bee flew forth with his spoilshe would begin--that should be the sign. out he came.
　　\"mamma! papa is going to leave helstone!\" she blurted forth. \"he\"sgoing to leave the church, and live in milton-northern.\" there were thethree hard facts hardly spoken.
　　\"what makes you say so?\" asked mrs. hale, in a surprised incredulousvoice. \"who has been telling you such nonsense?\"
　　\"papa himself,\" said margaret, longing to say something gentle andconsoling, but literally not knowing how. they were close to a garden-bench. mrs. hale sat down, and began to cry.
　　\"i don\"t understand you,\" she said. \"either you have made some greatmistake, or i don\"t quite understand you.\"
　　\"no, mother, i have made no mistake. papa has written to the bishop,saying that he has such doubts that he cannot conscientiously remain apriest of the church of england, and that he must give up helstone. hehas also consulted mr. bell--frederick\"s godfather, you know, mamma;and it is arranged that we go to live in milton-northern.\" mrs. halelooked up in margaret\"s face all the time she was speaking these words:
　　the shadow on her countenance told that she, at least, believed in thetruth of what she said.
　　\"i don\"t think it can be true,\" said mrs. hale, at length. \"he would surelyhave told me before it came to this.\"
　　it came strongly upon margaret\"s mind that her mother ought to havebeen told: that whatever her faults of discontent and repining mighthave been, it was an error in her father to have left her to learn hischange of opinion, and his approaching change of life, from her better-informed child. margaret sat down by her mother, and took herunresisting head on her breast, bending her own soft cheeks downcaressingly to touch her face.
　　\"dear, darling mamma! we were so afraid of giving you pain. papa feltso acutely--you know you are not strong, and there must have been suchterrible suspense to go through.\"
　　\"when did he tell you, margaret?\"
　　\"yesterday, only yesterday,\" replied margaret, detecting the jealousywhich prompted the inquiry. \"poor papa!\"--trying to divert her mother\"sthoughts into compassionate sympathy for all her father had gonethrough. mrs. hale raised her head.
　　\"what does he mean by having doubts?\" she asked. \"surely, he does notmean that he thinks differently--that he knows better than the church.\"
　　margaret shook her head, and the tears came into her eyes, as hermother touched the bare nerve of her own regret.
　　\"can\"t the bishop set him right?\" asked mrs. hale, half impatiently.
　　\"i\"m afraid not,\" said margaret. \"but i did not ask. i could not bear to hearwhat he might answer. it is all settled at any rate. he is going to leavehelstone in a fortnight. i am not sure if he did not say he had sent in hisdeed of resignation.\"
　　\"in a fortnight!\" exclaimed mrs. hale, \"i do think this is very strange--notat all right. i call it very unfeeling,\" said she, beginning to take relief intears. \"he has doubts, you say, and gives up his living, and all withoutconsulting me. i dare say, if he had told me his doubts at the first icould have nipped them in the bud.\"
　　mistaken as margaret felt her father\"s conduct to have been, she couldnot bear to hear it blamed by her mother. she knew that his very reservehad originated in a tenderness for her, which might be cowardly, butwas not unfeeling.
　　\"i almost hoped you might have been glad to leave helstone, mamma,\"
　　said she, after a pause. \"you have never been well in this air, you know.\"
　　\"you can\"t think the smoky air of a manufacturing town, all chimneysand dirt like milton-northern, would be better than this air, which ispure and sweet, if it is too soft and relaxing. fancy living in the middleof factories, and factory people! though, of course, if your father leaves
　　the church, we shall not be admitted into society anywhere. it will besuch a disgrace to us! poor dear sir john! it is well he is not alive to seewhat your father has come to! every day after dinner, when i was a girl,living with your aunt shaw, at beresford court, sir john used to givefor the first toast--\"church and king, and down with the rump.\"\"
　　margaret was glad that her mother\"s thoughts were turned away fromthe fact of her husband\"s silence to her on the point which must havebeen so near his heart. next to the serious vital anxiety as to the natureof her father\"s doubts, this was the one circumstance of the case thatgave margaret the most pain.
　　\"you know, we have very little society here, mamma. the gormans,who are our nearest neighbours (to call society--and we hardly ever seethem), have been in trade just as much as these milton-northernpeople.\"
　　\"yes,\" said mrs. hale, almost indignantly, \"but, at any rate, the gormansmade carriages for half the gentry of the county, and were brought intosome kind of intercourse with them; but these factory people, who onearth wears cotton that can afford linen?\"
　　\"well, mamma, i give up the cotton-spinners; i am not standing up forthem, any more than for any other trades-people. only we shall havelittle enough to do with them.\"
　　\"why on earth has your father fixed on milton-northern to live in?\"
　　\"partly,\" said margaret, sighing, \"because it is so very different fromhelstone--partly because mr. bell says there is an opening there for aprivate tutor.\"
　　\"private tutor in milton! why can\"t he go to oxford, and be a tutor togentlemen?\"
   



第18章 CHAPTER V DECISION (3)


　　\"you forget, mamma! he is leaving the church on account of hisopinions--his doubts would do him no good at oxford.\"
　　mrs. hale was silent for some time, quietly crying. at last she said:-\"
　　and the furniture--how in the world are we to manage the removal? inever removed in my life, and only a fortnight to think about it!\"
　　margaret was inexpressibly relieved to find that her mother\"s anxietyand distress was lowered to this point, so insignificant to herself, and onwhich she could do so much to help. she planned and promised, and ledher mother on to arrange fully as much as could be fixed before theyknew somewhat more definitively what mr. hale intended to do.
　　throughout the day margaret never left her mother; bending her wholesoul to sympathise in all the various turns her feelings took; towardsevening especially, as she became more and more anxious that herfather should find a soothing welcome home awaiting him, after hisreturn from his day of fatigue and distress. she dwelt upon what hemust have borne in secret for long; her mother only replied coldly that
　　he ought to have told her, and that then at any rate he would have hadan adviser to give him counsel; and margaret turned faint at heart whenshe heard her father\"s step in the hall. she dared not go to meet him, andtell him what she had done all day, for fear of her mother\"s jealousannoyance. she heard him linger, as if awaiting her, or some sign ofher; and she dared not stir; she saw by her mother\"s twitching lips, andchanging colour, that she too was aware that her husband had returned.
　　presently he opened the room-door, and stood there uncertain whetherto come in. his face was gray and pale; he had a timid, fearful look inhis eyes; something almost pitiful to see in a man\"s face; but that look ofdespondent uncertainty, of mental and bodily languor, touched hiswife\"s heart. she went to him, and threw herself on his breast, crying out\"oh! richard, richard, you should have told me sooner!\"
　　and then, in tears, margaret left her, as she rushed up-stairs to throwherself on her bed, and hide her face in the pillows to stifle the hystericsobs that would force their way at last, after the rigid self-control of thewhole day.
　　how long she lay thus she could not tell. she heard no noise, though thehousemaid came in to arrange the room. the affrighted girl stole outagain on tip-toe, and went and told mrs. dixon that miss hale wascrying as if her heart would break: she was sure she would make herselfdeadly ill if she went on at that rate. in consequence of this, margaretfelt herself touched, and started up into a sitting posture; she saw theaccustomed room, the figure of dixon in shadow, as the latter stoodholding the candle a little behind her, for fear of the effect on misshale\"s startled eyes, swollen and blinded as they were.
　　\"oh, dixon! i did not hear you come into the room!\" said margaret,resuming her trembling self-restraint. \"is it very late?\" continued she,lifting herself languidly off the bed, yet letting her feet touch the groundwithout fairly standing down, as she shaded her wet ruffled hair off herface, and tried to look as though nothing were the matter; as if she hadonly been asleep.
　　\"i hardly can tell what time it is,\" replied dixon, in an aggrieved tone ofvoice. \"since your mamma told me this terrible news, when i dressedher for tea, i\"ve lost all count of time. i\"m sure i don\"t know what is tobecome of us all. when charlotte told me just now you were sobbing,miss hale, i thought, no wonder, poor thing! and master thinking ofturning dissenter at his time of life, when, if it is not to be said he\"sdone well in the church, he\"s not done badly after all. i had a cousin,miss, who turned methodist preacher after he was fifty years of age, anda tailor all his life; but then he had never been able to make a pair oftrousers to fit, for as long as he had been in the trade, so it was no
　　wonder; but for master! as i said to missus, \"what would poor sir johnhave said? he never liked your marrying mr. hale, but if he could haveknown it would have come to this, he would have sworn worse oathsthan ever, if that was possible!\"\"
　　dixon had been so much accustomed to comment upon mr. hale\"sproceedings to her mistress (who listened to her, or not, as she was inthe humour), that she never noticed margaret\"s flashing eye and dilatingnostril. to hear her father talked of in this way by a servant to her face!
　　\"dixon,\" she said, in the low tone she always used when much excited,which had a sound in it as of some distant turmoil, or threatening stormbreaking far away. \"dixon! you forget to whom you are speaking.\" shestood upright and firm on her feet now, confronting the waiting-maid,and fixing her with her steady discerning eye. \"i am mr. hale\"s daughter.
　　go! you have made a strange mistake, and one that i am sure your owngood feeling will make you sorry for when you think about it.\"
　　dixon hung irresolutely about the room for a minute or two. margaretrepeated, \"you may leave me, dixon. i wish you to go.\" dixon did notknow whether to resent these decided words or to cry; either coursewould have done with her mistress: but, as she said to herself, \"missmargaret has a touch of the old gentleman about her, as well as poormaster frederick; i wonder where they get it from?\" and she, whowould have resented such words from any one less haughty anddetermined in manner, was subdued enough to say, in a half humble,half injured tone:
　　\"mayn\"t i unfasten your gown, miss, and do your hair?\"
　　\"no! not to-night, thank you.\" and margaret gravely lighted her out ofthe room, and bolted the door. from henceforth dixon obeyed andadmired margaret. she said it was because she was so like poor masterfrederick; but the truth was, that dixon, as do many others, liked to feelherself ruled by a powerful and decided nature.
www．Ｌｚｕｏｗｅｎ．ｃｏｍ



第19章 CHAPTER V DECISION (4)


　　margaret needed all dixon\"s help in action, and silence in words; for,for some time, the latter thought it her duty to show her sense of affrontby saying as little as possible to her young lady; so the energy came outin doing rather than in speaking a fortnight was a very short time tomake arrangements for so serious a removal; as dixon said, \"any onebut a gentleman--indeed almost any other gentleman--\" but catching alook at margaret\"s straight, stern brow just here, she coughed theremainder of the sentence away, and meekly took the horehound dropthat margaret offered her, to stop the \"little tickling at my chest, miss.\"
　　but almost any one but mr. hale would have had practical knowledgeenough to see, that in so short a time it would be difficult to fix on anyhouse in milton-northern, or indeed elsewhere, to which they couldremove the furniture that had of necessity to be taken out of helstone
　　vicarage.
　　mrs. hale, overpowered by all the troubles and necessities forimmediate household decisions that seemed to come upon her at once,became really ill, and margaret almost felt it as a relief when hermother fairly took to her bed, and left the management of affairs to her.
　　dixon, true to her post of body-guard, attended most faithfully to hermistress, and only emerged from mrs. hale\"s bed-room to shake herhead, and murmur to herself in a manner which margaret did notchoose to hear. for, the one thing clear and straight before her, was thenecessity for leaving helstone. mr. hale\"s successor in the living wasappointed; and, at any rate, after her father\"s decision; there must be nolingering now, for his sake, as well as from every other consideration.
　　for he came home every evening more and more depressed, after thenecessary leave-taking which he had resolved to have with everyindividual parishioner. margaret, inexperienced as she was in all thenecessary matter-of-fact business to be got through, did not know towhom to apply for advice. the cook and charlotte worked away withwilling arms and stout hearts at all the moving and packing; and as faras that went, margaret\"s admirable sense enabled her to see what wasbest, and to direct how it should be done. but where were they to go to?
　　in a week they must be gone. straight to milton, or where? so manyarrangements depended on this decision that margaret resolved to askher father one evening, in spite of his evident fatigue and low spirits. heanswered:
　　\"my dear! i have really had too much to think about to settle this. whatdoes your mother say? what does she wish? poor maria!\"
　　he met with an echo even louder than his sigh. dixon had just comeinto the room for another cup of tea for mrs. hale, and catching mr.
　　hale\"s last words, and protected by his presence from margaret\"supbraiding eyes, made bold to say, \"my poor mistress!\"
　　\"you don\"t think her worse to-day,\" said mr. hale, turning hastily.
　　\"i\"m sure i can\"t say, sir. it\"s not for me to judge. the illness seems somuch more on the mind than on the body.\"
　　mr. hale looked infinitely distressed.
　　\"you had better take mamma her tea while it is hot, dixon,\" saidmargaret, in a tone of quiet authority.
　　\"oh! i beg your pardon, miss! my thoughts was otherwise occupied inthinking of my poor----of mrs. hale.\"
　　\"papa!\" said margaret, \"it is this suspense that is bad for you both. ofcourse, mamma must feel your change of opinions: we can\"t help that,\"




第20章 CHAPTER V DECISION (5)


　　she continued, softly; \"but now the course is clear, at least to a certainpoint. and i think, papa, that i could get mamma to help me inplanning, if you could tell me what to plan for. she has never expressed
　　any wish in any way, and only thinks of what can\"t be helped. are we togo straight to milton? have you taken a house there?\"
　　\"no,\" he replied. \"i suppose we must go into lodgings, and look about fora house.
　　\"and pack up the furniture so that it can be left at the railway station, tillwe have met with one?\"
　　\"i suppose so. do what you think best. only remember, we shall havemuch less money to spend.\"
　　they had never had much superfluity, as margaret knew. she felt that itwas a great weight suddenly thrown upon her shoulders. four monthsago, all the decisions she needed to make were what dress she wouldwear for dinner, and to help edith to draw out the lists of who shouldtake down whom in the dinner parties at home. nor was the householdin which she lived one that called for much decision. except in the onegrand case of captain lennox\"s offer, everything went on with theregularity of clockwork. once a year, there was a long discussionbetween her aunt and edith as to whether they should go to the isle ofwight, abroad, or to scotland; but at such times margaret herself wassecure of drifting, without any exertion of her own, into the quietharbour of home. now, since that day when mr. lennox came, andstartled her into a decision, every day brought some question,momentous to her, and to those whom she loved, to be settled.
　　her father went up after tea to sit with his wife. margaret remainedalone in the drawing-room. suddenly she took a candle and went intoher father\"s study for a great atlas, and lugging it back into the drawing-room, she began to pore over the map of england. she was ready tolook up brightly when her father came down stairs.
　　\"i have hit upon such a beautiful plan. look here--in darkshire, hardlythe breadth of my finger from milton, is heston, which i have oftenheard of from people living in the north as such a pleasant little bathing-place. now, don\"t you think we could get mamma there with dixon,while you and i go and look at houses, and get one all ready for her inmilton? she would get a breath of sea air to set her up for the winter,and be spared all the fatigue, and dixon would enjoy taking care of her.\"
　　\"is dixon to go with us?\" asked mr. hale, in a kind of helpless dismay.
　　\"oh, yes!\" said margaret. \"dixon quite intends it, and i don\"t know whatmamma would do without her.\"
　　\"but we shall have to put up with a very different way of living, i amafraid. everything is so much dearer in a town. i doubt if dixon canmake herself comfortable. to tell you the truth margaret, i sometimesfeel as if that woman gave herself airs.\"
　　\"to be sure she does, papa,\" replied margaret; \"and if she has to put upwith a different style of living, we shall have to put up with her airs,
　　which will be worse. but she really loves us all, and would be miserableto leave us, i am sure--especially in this change; so, for mamma\"s sake,and for the sake of her faithfulness, i do think she must go.\"
　　\"very well, my dear. go on. i am resigned. how far is heston frommilton? the breadth of one of your fingers does not give me a veryclear idea of distance.\"
　　\"well, then, i suppose it is thirty miles; that is not much!\"
　　\"not in distance, but in--. never mind! if you really think it will do yourmother good, let it be fixed so.\"
　　this was a great step. now margaret could work, and act, and plan ingood earnest. and now mrs. hale could rouse herself from her languor,and forget her real suffering in thinking of the pleasure and the delightof going to the sea-side. her only regret was that mr. hale could not bewith her all the fortnight she was to be there, as he had been for a wholefortnight once, when they were engaged, and she was staying with sirjohn and lady beresford at torquay.




第21章 CHAPTER VI FAREWELL (1)


　　\"unwatch\"d the garden bough shall sway,the tender blossom flutter down,unloved that beech will gather brown,the maple burn itself away;unloved, the sun-flower, shining fair,ray round with flames her disk of seed,and many a rose-carnation feedwith summer spice the humming air;till from the garden and the wilda fresh association blow,
　　and year by year the landscape growfamiliar to the stranger\"s childas year by year the labourer tillshis wonted glebe, or lops the glades;and year by year our memory fadesfrom all the circle of the hills.\"
　　tennyson.
　　the last day came; the house was full of packing-cases, which werebeing carted off at the front door, to the nearest railway station. eventhe pretty lawn at the side of the house was made unsightly and untidyby the straw that had been wafted upon it through the open door andwindows. the rooms had a strange echoing sound in them,--and thelight came harshly and strongly in through the uncurtained windows,-seemingalready unfamiliar and strange. mrs. hale\"s dressing-room wasleft untouched to the last; and there she and dixon were packing upclothes, and interrupting each other every now and then to exclaim at,and turn over with fond regard, some forgotten treasure, in the shape ofsome relic of the children while they were yet little. they did not makemuch progress with their work. down-stairs, margaret stood calm andcollected, ready to counsel or advise the men who had been called in tohelp the cook and charlotte. these two last, crying between whiles,wondered how the young lady could keep up so this last day, and settledit between them that she was not likely to care much for helstone,having been so long in london. there she stood, very pale and quiet,with her large grave eyes observing everything,--up to every presentcircumstance, however small. they could not understand how her heartwas aching all the time, with a heavy pressure that no sighs could liftoff or relieve, and how constant exertion for her perceptive facultieswas the only way to keep herself from crying out with pain. moreover,if she gave way, who was to act? her father was examining papers,books, registers, what not, in the vestry with the clerk; and when hecame in, there were his own books to pack up, which no one but himselfcould do to his satisfaction. besides, was margaret one to give waybefore strange men, or even household friends like the cook andcharlotte! not she. but at last the four packers went into the kitchen totheir tea; and margaret moved stiffly and slowly away from the place inthe hall where she had been standing so long, out through the bareechoing drawing-room, into the twilight of an early november evening.
　　there was a filmy veil of soft dull mist obscuring, but not hiding, allobjects, giving them a lilac hue, for the sun had not yet fully set; a robinwas singing,--perhaps, margaret thought, the very robin that her fatherhad so often talked of as his winter pet, and for which he had made,with his own hands, a kind of robin-house by his study-window. theleaves were more gorgeous than ever; the first touch of frost would laythem all low on the ground. already one or two kept constantly floatingdown, amber and golden in the low slanting sun-rays.
　　margaret went along the walk under the pear-tree wall. she had neverbeen along it since she paced it at henry lennox\"s side. here, at this bedof thyme, he began to speak of what she must not think of now. hereyes were on that late-blowing rose as she was trying to answer; andshe had caught the idea of the vivid beauty of the feathery leaves of thecarrots in the very middle of his last sentence. only a fortnight ago andall so changed! where was he now? in london,--going through the oldround; dining with the old harley street set, or with gayer youngfriends of his own. even now, while she walked sadly through thatdamp and drear garden in the dusk, with everything falling and fading,and turning to decay around her, he might be gladly putting away hislaw-books after a day of satisfactory toil, and freshening himself up, ashe had told her he often did, by a run in the temple gardens, taking inthe while the grand inarticulate mighty roar of tens of thousands of busymen, nigh at hand, but not seen, and catching ever, at his quick turns,glimpses of the lights of the city coming up out of the depths of theriver. he had often spoken to margaret of these hasty walks, snatched inthe intervals between study and dinner. at his best times and in his bestmoods had he spoken of them; and the thought of them had struck uponher fancy. here there was no sound. the robin had gone away into thevast stillness of night. now and then, a cottage door in the distance wasopened and shut, as if to admit the tired labourer to his home; but thatsounded very far away. a stealthy, creeping, cranching sound amongthe crisp fallen leaves of the forest, beyond the garden, seemed almostclose at hand. margaret knew it was some poacher. sitting up in her bedroomthis past autumn, with the light of her candle extinguished, andpurely revelling in the solemn beauty of the heavens and the earth, shehad many a time seen the light noiseless leap of the poachers over thegarden-fence, their quick tramp across the dewy moonlit lawn, theirdisappearance in the black still shadow beyond. the wild adventurousfreedom of their life had taken her fancy; she felt inclined to wish themsuccess; she had no fear of them. but to-night she was afraid, she knewnot why. she heard charlotte shutting the windows, and fastening upfor the night, unconscious that any one had gone out into the garden. asmall branch--it might be of rotten wood, or it might be broken by force
　　-came heavily down in the nearest part of the forest, margaret ran, swiftas camilla, down to the window, and rapped at it with a hurriedtremulousness which startled charlotte within.
www．Ｌｚｕｏｗｅｎ．ｃｏｍ  http://www.xiaboＯk.com



第22章 CHAPTER VI FAREWELL (2)


　　\"let me in! let me in! it is only me, charlotte!\" her heart did not still itsfluttering till she was safe in the drawing-room, with the windowsfastened and bolted, and the familiar walls hemming her round, andshutting her in. she had sate down upon a packing case; cheerless, chillwas the dreary and dismantled room--no fire nor other light, butcharlotte\"s long unsnuffed candle. charlotte looked at margaret withsurprise; and margaret, feeling it rather than seeing it, rose up.
　　\"i was afraid you were shutting me out altogether, charlotte,\" said she,half-smiling. \"and then you would never have heard me in the kitchen,and the doors into the lane and churchyard are locked long ago.\"
　　\"oh, miss, i should have been sure to have missed you soon. the menwould have wanted you to tell them how to go on. and i have put tea inmaster\"s study, as being the most comfortable room, so to speak.\"
　　\"thank you, charlotte. you are a kind girl. i shall be sorry to leave you.
　　you must try and write to me, if i can ever give you any little help orgood advice. i shall always be glad to get a letter from helstone, youknow. i shall be sure and send you my address when. i know it.\"
　　the study was all ready for tea. there was a good blazing fire, andunlighted candles on the table. margaret sat down on the rug, partly towarm herself, for the dampness of the evening hung about her dress,and overfatigue had made her chilly. she kept herself balanced byclasping her hands together round her knees; her head dropped a littletowards her chest; the attitude was one of despondency, whatever herframe of mind might be. but when she heard her father\"s step on thegravel outside, she started up, and hastily shaking her heavy black hairback, and wiping a few tears away that had come on her cheeks sheknew not how, she went out to open the door for him. he showed farmore depression than she did. she could hardly get him to talk,although she tried to speak on subjects that would interest him, at thecost of an effort every time which she thought would be her last.
　　\"have you been a very long walk to-day?\" asked she, on seeing hisrefusal to touch food of any kind.
　　\"as far as fordham beeches. i went to see widow maltby; she is sadlygrieved at not having wished you good-bye. she says little susan haskept watch down the lane for days past.--nay, margaret, what is thematter, dear?\" the thought of the little child watching for her, andcontinually disappointed--from no forgetfulness on her part, but fromsheer inability to leave home--was the last drop in poor margaret\"s cup,and she was sobbing away as if her heart would break. mr. hale wasdistressingly perplexed. he rose, and walked nervously up and down
　　the room. margaret tried to check herself, but would not speak until shecould do so with firmness. she heard him talking, as if to himself.
　　\"i cannot bear it. i cannot bear to see the sufferings of others. i think icould go through my own with patience. oh, is there no going back?\"
　　\"no, father,\" said margaret, looking straight at him, and speaking lowand steadily. \"it is bad to believe you in error. it would he infinitelyworse to have known you a hypocrite.\" she dropped her voice at the lastfew words, as if entertaining the idea of hypocrisy for a moment inconnection with her father savoured of irreverence.
wwＷ．7wenxue.com  http://www.xiaboＯk.com



第23章 CHAPTER VI FAREWELL (3)


　　\"besides,\" she went on, \"it is only that i am tired to-night; don\"t think thati am suffering from what you have done, dear papa. we can\"t either ofus talk about it to-night, i believe,\" said she, finding that tears and sobswould come in spite of herself. \"i had better go and take mamma up thiscup of tea. she had hers very early, when i was too busy to go to her,and i am sure she will be glad of another now.\"
　　railroad time inexorably wrenched them away from lovely, belovedhelstone, the next morning. they were gone; they had seen the last ofthe long low parsonage home, half-covered with china-roses andpyracanthus--more homelike than ever in the morning sun that glitteredon its windows, each belonging to some well-loved room. almostbefore they had settled themselves into the car, sent from southamptonto fetch them to the station, they were gone away to return no more. asting at margaret\"s heart made her strive to look out to catch the lastglimpse of the old church tower at the turn where she knew it might beseen above a wave of the forest trees; but her father remembered thistoo, and she silently acknowledged his greater right to the one windowfrom which it could be seen. she leant back and shut her eyes, and thetears welled forth, and hung glittering for an instant on the shadowingeye-lashes before rolling slowly down her cheeks, and dropping,unheeded, on her dress.
　　they were to stop in london all night at some quiet hotel. poor mrs.
　　hale had cried in her way nearly all day long; and dixon showed hersorrow by extreme crossness, and a continual irritable attempt to keepher petticoats from even touching the unconscious mr. hale, whom sheregarded as the origin of all this suffering.
　　they went through the well-known streets, past houses which they hadoften visited, past shops in which she had lounged, impatient, by heraunt\"s side, while that lady was making some important andinterminable decision-nay, absolutely past acquaintances in the streets;for though the morning had been of an incalculable length to them, andthey felt as if it ought long ago to have closed in for the repose ofdarkness, it was the very busiest time of a london afternoon innovember when they arrived there. it was long since mrs. hale had
　　been in london; and she roused up, almost like a child, to look abouther at the different streets, and to gaze after and exclaim at the shopsand carriages.
　　\"oh, there\"s harrison\"s, where i bought so many of my wedding-things.
　　dear! how altered! they\"ve got immense plate-glass windows, largerthan crawford\"s in southampton. oh, and there, i declare--no, it is not-yes,it is--margaret, we have just passed mr. henry lennox. where canhe be going, among all these shops?\"
　　margaret started forwards, and as quickly fell back, half-smiling atherself for the sudden motion. they were a hundred yards away by thistime; but he seemed like a relic of helstone--he was associated with abright morning, an eventful day, and she should have liked to have seenhim, without his seeing her,--without the chance of their speaking.
　　the evening, without employment, passed in a room high up in anhotel, was long and heavy. mr. hale went out to his bookseller\"s, and tocall on a friend or two. every one they saw, either in the house or out inthe streets, appeared hurrying to some appointment, expected by, orexpecting somebody. they alone seemed strange and friendless, anddesolate. yet within a mile, margaret knew of house after house, whereshe for her own sake, and her mother for her aunt shaw\"s, would bewelcomed, if they came in gladness, or even in peace of mind. if theycame sorrowing, and wanting sympathy in a complicated trouble likethe present, then they would be felt as a shadow in all these houses ofintimate acquaintances, not friends. london life is too whirling and fullto admit of even an hour of that deep silence of feeling which thefriends of job showed, when \"they sat with him on the ground sevendays and seven nights, and none spake a word unto him; for they sawthat his grief was very great.\"




第24章 CHAPTER VII NEW SCENES AND FACES (1)


　　\"mist clogs the sunshine,smoky dwarf houseshave we round on every side.\"
　　matthew arnold.
　　the next afternoon, about twenty miles from milton-northern, theyentered on the little branch railway that led to heston. heston itself was
　　one long straggling street, running parallel to the seashore. it had acharacter of its own, as different from the little bathing-places in thesouth of england as they again from those of the continent. to use ascotch word, every thing looked more \"purposelike.\" the country cartshad more iron, and less wood and leather about the horse-gear; thepeople in the streets, although on pleasure bent, had yet a busy mind.
　　the colours looked grayer--more enduring, not so gay and pretty. therewere no smock-frocks, even among the country folk; they retardedmotion, and were apt to catch on machinery, and so the habit of wearingthem had died out. in such towns in the south of england, margaret hadseen the shopmen, when not employed in their business, lounging alittle at their doors, enjoying the fresh air, and the look up and down thestreet. here, if they had any leisure from customers, they madethemselves business in the shop--even, margaret fancied, to theunnecessary unrolling and rerolling of ribbons. all these differencesstruck upon her mind, as she and her mother went out next morning tolook for lodgings.
　　their two nights at hotels had cost more than mr. hale had anticipated,and they were glad to take the first clean, cheerful for the first time formany days, did margaret feel at rest. there rooms they met with thatwere at liberty to receive them. there, was a dreaminess in the rest, too,which made it still more perfect and luxurious to repose in. the distantsea, lapping the sandy shore with measured sound; the nearer cries ofthe donkey-boys; the unusual scenes moving before her like pictures,which she cared not in her laziness to have fully explained before theypassed away; the stroll down to the beach to breathe the sea-air, soft andwarm on that sandy shore even to the end of november; the great longmisty sea-line touching the tender-coloured sky; the white sail of adistant boat turning silver in some pale sunbeam:--it seemed as if shecould dream her life away in such luxury of pensiveness, in which shemade her present all in all, from not daring to think of the past, orwishing to contemplate the future.
　　but the future must be met, however stern and iron it be. one evening itwas arranged that margaret and her father should go the next day tomilton-northern, and look out for a house. mr. hale had receivedseveral letters from mr. bell, and one or two from mr. thornton, and hewas anxious to ascertain at once a good many particulars respecting hisposition and chances of success there, which he could only do by aninterview with the latter gentleman. margaret knew that they ought tobe removing; but she had a repugnance to the idea of a manufacturingtown, and believed that her mother was receiving benefit from hestonair, so she would willingly have deferred the expedition to milton.
　　for several miles before they reached milton, they saw a deep lead
　　coloured cloud hanging over the horizon in the direction in which it lay.
　　it was all the darker from contrast with the pale gray-blue of the wintrysky; for in heston there had been the earliest signs of frost. nearer tothe town, the air had a faint taste and smell of smoke; perhaps, after all,more a loss of the fragrance of grass and herbage than any positive tasteor smell. quick they were whirled over long, straight, hopeless streetsof regularly-built houses, all small and of brick. here and there a greatoblong many-windowed factory stood up, like a hen among herchickens, puffing out black \"unparliamentary\" smoke, and sufficientlyaccounting for the cloud which margaret had taken to foretell rain. asthey drove through the larger and wider streets, from the station to thehotel, they had to stop constantly; great loaded lurries blocked up thenot over-wide thoroughfares. margaret had now and then been into thecity in her drives with her aunt. but there the heavy lumbering vehiclesseemed various in their purposes and intent; here every van, everywaggon and truck, bore cotton, either in the raw shape in bags, or thewoven shape in bales of calico. people thronged the footpaths, most ofthem well-dressed as regarded the material, but with a slovenlylooseness which struck margaret as different from the shabby,threadbare smartness of a similar class in london.
　　\"new street,\" said mr. hale. \"this, i believe, is the principal street inmilton. bell has often spoken to me about it. it was the opening of thisstreet from a lane into a great thoroughfare, thirty years ago, which hascaused his property to rise so much in value. mr. thornton\"s mill mustbe somewhere not very far off, for he is mr. bell\"s tenant. but i fancy hedates from his warehouse.\"
　　\"where is our hotel, papa?\"
　　\"close to the end of this street, i believe. shall we have lunch before orafter we have looked at the houses we marked in the milton times?\"
　　\"oh, let us get our work done first.\"
　　\"very well. then i will only see if there is any note or letter for me frommr. thornton, who said he would let me know anything he might hearabout these houses, and then we will set off. we will keep the cab; itwill be safer than losing ourselves, and being too late for the train thisafternoon.\"
　　there were no letters awaiting him. they set out on their house-hunting. thirty pounds a-year was all they could afford to give, but inhampshire they could have met with a roomy house and pleasantgarden for the money. here, even the necessary accommodation of twositting-rooms and four bed-rooms seemed unattainable. they wentthrough their list, rejecting each as they visited it. then they looked ateach other in dismay.
　　\"we must go back to the second, i think. that one,--in crampton, don\"t
　　they call the suburb? there were three sitting-rooms; don\"t youremember how we laughed at the number compared with the three bedrooms?




第25章 CHAPTER VII NEW SCENES AND FACES (2)


　　but i have planned it all. the front room down-stairs is to beyour study and our dining-room (poor papa!), for, you know, we settledmamma is to have as cheerful a sitting-room as we can get; and thatfront room up-stairs, with the atrocious blue and pink paper and heavycornice, had really a pretty view over the plain, with a great bend ofriver, or canal, or whatever it is, down below. then i could have thelittle bed-room behind, in that projection at the head of the first flight ofstairs--over the kitchen, you know--and you and mamma the roombehind the drawing-room, and that closet in the roof will make you asplendid dressing-room.\"
　　\"but dixon, and the girl we are to have to help?\"
　　\"oh, wait a minute. i am overpowered by the discovery of my owngenius for management. dixon is to have--let me see, i had it once--theback sitting-room. i think she will like that. she grumbles so muchabout the stairs at heston; and the girl is to have that sloping attic overyour room and mamma\"s. won\"t that do?\"
　　\"i dare say it will. but the papers. what taste! and the overloading sucha house with colour and such heavy cornices!\"
　　\"never mind, papa! surely, you can charm the landlord into re-paperingone or two of the rooms--the drawing-room and your bed-room--formamma will come most in contact with them; and your book-shelveswill hide a great deal of that gaudy pattern in the dining-room.\"
　　\"then you think it the best? if so, i had better go at once and call on thismr. donkin, to whom the advertisement refers me. i will take you backto the hotel, where you can order lunch, and rest, and by the time it isready, i shall be with you. i hope i shall be able to get new papers.\"
　　margaret hoped so too, though she said nothing. she had never comefairly in contact with the taste that loves ornament, however bad, morethan the plainness and simplicity which are of themselves theframework of elegance.
　　her father took her through the entrance of the hotel, and leaving her atthe foot of the staircase, went to the address of the landlord of the housethey had fixed upon. just as margaret had her hand on the door of theirsitting-room, she was followed by a quick-stepping waiter:
　　\"i beg your pardon, ma\"am. the gentleman was gone so quickly, i hadno time to tell him. mr. thornton called almost directly after you left;and, as i understood from what the gentleman said, you would be backin an hour, i told him so, and he came again about five minutes ago, andsaid he would wait for mr. hale. he is in your room now, ma\"am.\"
　　\"thank you. my father will return soon, and then you can tell him.\"
　　margaret opened the door and went in with the straight, fearless,
　　dignified presence habitual to her. she felt no awkwardness; she had toomuch the habits of society for that. here was a person come on businessto her father; and, as he was one who had shown himself obliging, shewas disposed to treat him with a full measure of civility. mr. thorntonwas a good deal more surprised and discomfited than she. instead of aquiet, middle-aged clergyman, a young lady came forward with frankdignity,--a young lady of a different type to most of those he was in thehabit of seeing. her dress was very plain: a close straw bonnet of thebest material and shape, trimmed with white ribbon; a dark silk gown,without any trimming or flounce; a large indian shawl, which hungabout her in long heavy folds, and which she wore as an empress wearsher drapery. he did not understand who she was, as he caught thesimple, straight, unabashed look, which showed that his being there wasof no concern to the beautiful countenance, and called up no flush ofsurprise to the pale ivory of the complexion. he had heard that mr. halehad a daughter, but he had imagined that she was a little girl.
　　\"mr. thornton, i believe!\" said margaret, after a half-instant\"s pause,during which his unready words would not come. \"will you sit down.
　　my father brought me to the door, not a minute ago, but unfortunatelyhe was not told that you were here, and he has gone away on somebusiness. but he will come back almost directly. i am sorry you havehad the trouble of calling twice.\"
　　mr. thornton was in habits of authority himself, but she seemed toassume some kind of rule over him at once. he had been gettingimpatient at the loss of his time on a market-day, the moment before sheappeared, yet now he calmly took a seat at her bidding.
　　\"do you know where it is that mr. hale has gone to? perhaps i might beable to find him.\"
　　\"he has gone to a mr. donkin\"s in canute street. he is the land-lord ofthe house my father wishes to take in crampton.\"
　　mr. thornton knew the house. he had seen the advertisement, and beento look at it, in compliance with a request of mr. bell\"s that he wouldassist mr. hale to the best of his power: and also instigated by his owninterest in the case of a clergyman who had given up his living undercircumstances such as those of mr. hale. mr. thornton had thought thatthe house in crampton was really just the thing; but now that he sawmargaret, with her superb ways of moving and looking, he began to feelashamed of having imagined that it would do very well for the hales, inspite of a certain vulgarity in it which had struck him at the time of hislooking it over.
www.xiabook.com下+书+网



第26章 CHAPTER VII NEW SCENES AND FACES (3)


　　margaret could not help her looks; but the short curled upper lip, theround, massive up-turned chin, the manner of carrying her head, hermovements, full of a soft feminine defiance, always gave strangers the
　　impression of haughtiness. she was tired now, and would rather haveremained silent, and taken the rest her father had planned for her; but, ofcourse, she owed it to herself to be a gentlewoman, and to speakcourteously from time to time to this stranger; not over-brushed, norover-polished, it must be confessed, after his rough encounter withmilton streets and crowds. she wished that he would go, as he had oncespoken of doing, instead of sitting there, answering with curt sentencesall the remarks she made. she had taken off her shawl, and hung it overthe back of her chair. she sat facing him and facing the light; her fullbeauty met his eye; her round white flexile throat rising out of the full,yet lithe figure; her lips, moving so slightly as she spoke, not breakingthe cold serene look of her face with any variation from the one lovelyhaughty curve; her eyes, with their soft gloom, meeting his with quietmaiden freedom. he almost said to himself that he did not like her,before their conversation ended; he tried so to compensate himself forthe mortified feeling, that while he looked upon her with an admirationhe could not repress, she looked at him with proud indifference, takinghim, he thought, for what, in his irritation, he told himself he was--agreat rough fellow, with not a grace or a refinement about him. herquiet coldness of demeanour he interpreted into contemptuousness, andresented it in his heart to the pitch of almost inclining him to get up andgo away, and have nothing more to do with these hales, and theirsuperciliousness.
　　just as margaret had exhausted her last subject of conversation--and yetconversation that could hardly be called which consisted of so few andsuch short speeches--her father came in, and with his pleasantgentlemanly courteousness of apology, reinstated his name and familyin mr. thornton\"s good opinion.
　　mr. hale and his visitor had a good deal to say respecting their mutualfriend, mr. bell; and margaret, glad that her part of entertaining thevisitor was over, went to the window to try and make herself morefamiliar with the strange aspect of the street. she got so much absorbedin watching what was going on outside that she hardly heard her fatherwhen he spoke to her, and he had to repeat what he said:
　　\"margaret! the landlord will persist in admiring that hideous paper, and iam afraid we must let it remain.\"
　　\"oh dear! i am sorry!\" she replied, and began to turn over in her mindthe possibility of hiding part of it, at least, by some of her sketches, butgave up the idea at last, as likely only to make bad worse. her father,meanwhile, with his kindly country hospitality, was pressing mr.
　　thornton to stay to luncheon with them. it would have been veryinconvenient to him to do so, yet he felt that he should have yielded, ifmargaret by word or look had seconded her father\"s invitation; he was
　　glad she did not, and yet he was irritated at her for not doing it. shegave him a low, grave bow when he left, and he felt more awkward andself-conscious in every limb than he had ever done in all his life before.
　　\"well, margaret, now to luncheon, as fast we can. have you ordered it?\"
　　\"no, papa; that man was here when i came home, and i have never hadan opportunity.\"
　　\"then we must take anything we can get. he must have been waiting along time, i\"m afraid.\"
　　\"it seemed exceedingly long to me. i was just at the last gasp when youcame in. he never went on with any subject, but gave little, short,abrupt answers.\"
　　\"very much to the point though, i should think. he is a clearheadedfellow. he said (did you hear?) that crampton is on gravelly soil, andby far the most healthy suburb in the neighbour hood of milton.\"
　　when they returned to heston, there was the day\"s account to be givento mrs. hale, who was full of questions which they answered in theintervals of tea-drinking.
　　\"and what is your correspondent, mr. thornton, like?\"
　　\"ask margaret,\" said her husband. \"she and he had a long attempt atconversation, while i was away speaking to the landlord.\"
　　\"oh! i hardly know what he is like,\" said margaret, lazily; too tired totax her powers of description much. and then rousing herself, she said,\"he is a tall, broad-shouldered man, about--how old, papa?\"
　　\"i should guess about thirty.\"
　　\"about thirty--with a face that is neither exactly plain, nor yethandsome, nothing remarkable--not quite a gentleman; but that washardly to be expected.\"
　　\"not vulgar, or common though,\" put in her father, rather jealous of anydisparagement of the sole friend he had in milton.
　　\"oh no!\" said margaret. \"with such an expression of resolution andpower, no face, however plain in feature, could be either vulgar orcommon. i should not like to have to bargain with him; he looks veryinflexible. altogether a man who seems made for his niche, mamma;sagacious, and strong, as becomes a great tradesman.\"
　　\"don\"t call the milton manufacturers tradesmen, margaret,\" said herfather. \"they are very different.\"
　　\"are they? i apply the word to all who have something tangible to sell;but if you think the term is not correct, papa, i won\"t use it. but, ohmamma! speaking of vulgarity and commonness, you must prepareyourself for our drawing-room paper. pink and blue roses, with yellowleaves! and such a heavy cornice round the room!\"
　　but when they removed to their new house in milton, the obnoxiouspapers were gone. the landlord received their thanks very composedly;
　　and let them think, if they liked, that he had relented from his expresseddetermination not to repaper. there was no particular need to tell them,that what he did not care to do for a reverend mr. hale, unknown inmilton, he was only too glad to do at the one short sharp remonstranceof mr. thornton, the wealthy manufacturer.
www.xiabook.com  http://www.xiaboＯk.com



第27章 CHAPTER VIII HOME SICKNESS (1)


　　\"and it\"s hame, hame; hame,hame fain wad i be.\"
　　it needed the pretty light papering of the rooms to reconcile them tomilton. it needed more--more that could not be had. the thick yellownovember fogs had come on; and the view of the plain in the valley,made by the sweeping bend of the river, was all shut out when mrs.
　　hale arrived at her new home.
　　margaret and dixon had been at work for two days, unpacking andarranging, but everything inside the house still looked in disorder; andoutside a thick fog crept up to the very windows, and was driven in toevery open door in choking white wreaths of unwholesome mist.
　　\"oh, margaret! are we to live here?\" asked mrs. hale in blank dismay.
　　margaret\"s heart echoed the dreariness of the tone in which this questionwas put. she could scarcely command herself enough to say, \"oh, thefogs in london are sometimes far worse!\"
　　\"but then you knew that london itself, and friends lay behind it. here-well!
　　we are desolate. oh dixon, what a place this is!\"
　　\"indeed, ma\"am, i\"m sure it will be your death before long, and then iknow who\"ll--stay! miss hale, that\"s far too heavy for you to lift.\"
　　\"not at all, thank you, dixon,\" replied margaret, coldly. \"the best thingwe can do for mamma is to get her room quite ready for her to go tobed, while i go and bring her a cup of coffee.\"
　　mr. hale was equally out of spirits, and equally came upon margaretfor sympathy.
　　\"margaret, i do believe this is an unhealthy place. only suppose thatyour mother\"s health or yours should suffer. i wish i had gone into somecountry place in wales; this is really terrible,\" said he, going up to thewindow.
　　there was no comfort to be given. they were settled in milton, andmust endure smoke and fogs for a season; indeed, all other life seemedshut out from them by as thick a fog of circumstance. only the day
　　before, mr. hale had been reckoning up with dismay how much theirremoval and fortnight at heston had cost, and he found it had absorbednearly all his little stock of ready money. no! here they were, and herethey must remain.
　　at night when margaret realised this, she felt inclined to sit down in astupor of despair. the heavy smoky air hung about her bedroom, whichoccupied the long narrow projection at the back of the house. thewindow, placed at the side of the oblong, looked to the blank wall of asimilar projection, not above ten feet distant. it loomed through the foglike a great barrier to hope. inside the room everything was inconfusion. all their efforts had been directed to make her mother\"s roomcomfortable. margaret sat down on a box, the direction card uponwhich struck her as having been written at helstone--beautiful, belovedhelstone! she lost herself in dismal thought: but at last she determinedto take her mind away from the present; and suddenly remembered thatshe had a letter from edith which she had only half read in the bustle ofthe morning. it was to tell of their arrival at corfu; their voyage alongthe mediterranean--their music, and dancing on board ship; the gay newlife opening upon her; her house with its trellised balcony, and its viewsover white cliffs and deep blue sea.
　　edith wrote fluently and well, if not graphically. she could not onlyseize the salient and characteristic points of a scene, but she couldenumerate enough of indiscriminate particulars for margaret to make itout for herself captain lennox and another lately married officer shareda villa, high up on the beautiful precipitous rocks overhanging the sea.
　　their days, late as it was in the year, seemed spent in boating or landpic-nics; all out-of-doors, pleasure-seeking and glad, edith\"s life seemedlike the deep vault of blue sky above her, free--utterly free from fleck orcloud. her husband had to attend drill, and she, the most musicalofficer\"s wife there, had to copy the new and popular tunes out of themost recent english music, for the benefit of the bandmaster; thoseseemed their most severe and arduous duties. she expressed anaffectionate hope that, if the regiment stopped another year at corfu,margaret might come out and pay her a long visit. she asked margaretif she remembered the day twelve-month on which she, edith, wrote-howit rained all day long in harley street; and how she would not puton her new gown to go to a stupid dinner, and get it all wet andsplashed in going to the carriage; and how at that very dinner they hadfirst met captain lennox.
wwＷ、xiabook.com下{书}网



第28章 CHAPTER VIII HOME SICKNESS (2)


　　yes! margaret remembered it well. edith and mrs. shaw had gone todinner. margaret had joined the party in the evening. the recollectionof the plentiful luxury of all the arrangements, the stately handsomenessof the furniture, the size of the house, the peaceful, untroubled ease of
　　the visitors--all came vividly before her, in strange contrast to thepresent time. the smooth sea of that old life closed up, without a markleft to tell where they had all been. the habitual dinners, the calls, theshopping, the dancing evenings, were all going on, going on for ever,though her aunt shaw and edith were no longer there; and she, ofcourse, was even less missed. she doubted if any one of that old setever thought of her, except henry lennox. he too, she knew, wouldstrive to forget her, because of the pain she had caused him. she hadheard him often boast of his power of putting any disagreeable thoughtfar away from him. then she penetrated farther into what might havebeen. if she had cared for him as a lover, and had accepted him, and thischange in her father\"s opinions and consequent station had taken place,she could not doubt but that it would have been impatiently received bymr. lennox. it was a bitter mortification to her in one sense; but shecould bear it patiently, because she knew her father\"s purity of purpose,and that strengthened her to endure his errors, grave and serious thoughin her estimation they were. but the fact of the world esteeming herfather degraded, in its rough wholesale judgment, would haveoppressed and irritated mr. lennox. as she realised what might havebeen, she grew to be thankful for what was. they were at the lowestnow; they could not be worse. edith\"s astonishment and her aunt shaw\"sdismay would have to be met bravely, when their letters came. somargaret rose up and began slowly to undress herself, feeling the fullluxury of acting leisurely, late as it was, after all the past hurry of theday. she fell asleep, hoping for some brightness, either internal orexternal. but if she had known how long it would be before thebrightness came, her heart would have sunk low down. the time of theyear was most unpropitious to health as well as to spirits. her mothercaught a severe cold, and dixon herself was evidently not well,although margaret could not insult her more than by trying to save her,or by taking any care of her. they could hear of no girl to assist her; allwere at work in the factories; at least, those who applied were wellscolded by dixon, for thinking that such as they could ever be trusted towork in a gentleman\"s house. so they had to keep a charwoman inalmost constant employ. margaret longed to send for charlotte; butbesides the objection of her being a better servant than they could nowafford to keep, the distance was too great.
　　mr. hale met with several pupils, recommended to him by mr. bell, orby the more immediate influence of mr. thornton. they were mostly ofthe age when many boys would be still at school, but, according to theprevalent, and apparently well-founded notions of milton, to make a ladinto a good tradesman he must be caught young, and acclimated to thelife of the mill, or office, or warehouse. if he were sent to even the
　　scotch universities, he came back unsettled for commercial pursuits;how much more so if he went to oxford or cambridge, where he couldnot be entered till he was eighteen? so most of the manufacturersplaced their sons in sucking situations\" at fourteen or fifteen years ofage, unsparingly cutting away all off-shoots in the direction of literatureor high mental cultivation, in hopes of throwing the whole strength andvigour of the plant into commerce. still there were some wiser parents;and some young men, who had sense enough to perceive their owndeficiencies, and strive to remedy them. nay, there were a few nolonger youths, but men in the prime of life, who had the stern wisdomto acknowledge their own ignorance, and to learn late what they shouldhave learnt early. mr. thornton was perhaps the oldest of mr. hale\"spupils. he was certainly the favourite. mr. hale got into the habit ofquoting his opinions so frequently, and with such regard, that it becamea little domestic joke to wonder what time, during the hour appointedfor instruction, could be given to absolute learning, so much of itappeared to have been spent in conversation.
　　margaret rather encouraged this light, merry way of viewing her father\"sacquaintance with mr. thornton, because she felt that her mother wasinclined to look upon this new friendship of her husband\"s with jealouseyes. as long as his time had been solely occupied with his books andhis parishioners, as at helstone, she had appeared to care little whethershe saw much of him or not; but now that he looked eagerly forward toeach renewal of his intercourse with mr. thornton, she seemed hurt andannoyed, as if he were slighting her companionship for the first time.
　　mr. hale\"s over-praise had the usual effect of over-praise upon hisauditors; they were a little inclined to rebel against aristides beingalways called the just.
　　after a quiet life in a country parsonage for more than twenty years,there was something dazzling to mr. hale in the energy whichconquered immense difficulties with ease; the power of the machineryof milton, the power of the men of milton, impressed him with a senseof grandeur, which he yielded to without caring to inquire into thedetails of its exercise. but margaret went less abroad, among machineryand men; saw less of power in its public effect, and, as it happened, shewas thrown with one or two of those who, in all measures affectingmasses of people, must be acute sufferers for the good of many. thequestion always is, has everything been done to make the sufferings ofthese exceptions as small as possible? or, in the triumph of the crowdedprocession, have the helpless been trampled on, instead of being gentlylifted aside out of the roadway of the conqueror, whom they have nopower to accompany on his march?




第29章 CHAPTER VIII HOME SICKNESS (3)


　　it fell to margaret\"s share to have to look out for a servant to assist
　　dixon, who had at first undertaken to find just the person she wanted todo all the rough work of the house. but dixon\"s ideas of helpful girlswere founded on the recollection of tidy elder scholars at helstoneschool, who were only too proud to be allowed to come to theparsonage on a busy day, and treated mrs. dixon with all the respect,and a good deal more of fright, which they paid to mr. and mrs. hale.
　　dixon was not unconscious of this awed reverence which was given toher; nor did she dislike it; it flattered her much as louis the fourteenthwas flattered by his courtiers shading their eyes from the dazzling lightof his presence.\" but nothing short of her faithful love for mrs. halecould have made her endure the rough independent way in which all themilton girls, who made application for the servant\"s place, replied to herinquiries respecting their qualifications. they even went the length ofquestioning her back again; having doubts and fears of their own, as tothe solvency of a family who lived in a house of thirty pounds a-year,and yet gave themselves airs, and kept two servants, one of them sovery high and mighty. mr. hale was no longer looked upon as vicar ofhelstone, but as a man who only spent at a certain rate. margaret wasweary and impatient of the accounts which dixon perpetually broughtto mrs. hale of the behaviour of these would-be servants. not but whatmargaret was repelled by the rough uncourteous manners of thesepeople; not but what she shrunk with fastidious pride from their hail-fellow accost and severely resented their unconcealed curiosity as to themeans and position of any family who lived in milton, and yet were notengaged in trade of some kind. but the more margaret feltimpertinence, the more likely she was to be silent on the subject; and, atany rate, if she took upon herself to make inquiry for a servant, shecould spare her mother the recital of all her disappointments andfancied or real insults.
　　margaret accordingly went up and down to butchers and grocers,seeking for a nonpareil of a girl; and lowering her hopes andexpectations every week, as she found the difficulty of meeting withany one in a manufacturing town who did not prefer the better wagesand greater independence of working in a mill. it was something of atrial to margaret to go out by herself in this busy bustling place. mrs.
　　shaw\"s ideas of propriety and her own helpless dependence on others,had always made her insist that a footman should accompany edith andmargaret, if they went beyond harley street or the immediateneighbourhood. the limits by which this rule of her aunt\"s hadcircumscribed margaret\"s independence had been silently rebelledagainst at the time: and she had doubly enjoyed the free walks andrambles of her forest life, from the contrast which they presented. shewent along there with a bounding fearless step, that occasionally broke
　　out into a run, if she were in a hurry, and occasionally was stilled intoperfect repose, as she stood listening to, or watching any of the wildcreatures who sang in the leafy courts, or glanced out with their keenbright eyes from the low brushwood or tangled furze. it was a trial tocome down from such motion or such stillness, only guided by her ownsweet will, to the even and decorous pace necessary in streets. but shecould have laughed at herself for minding this change, if it had not beenaccompanied by what was a more serious annoyance.
www.56ｗen．ＣＯＭ.  



第30章 CHAPTER VIII HOME SICKNESS (4)


　　the side of the town on which crampton lay was especially athoroughfare for the factory people. in the back streets around themthere were many mills, out of which poured streams of men and womentwo or three times a day. until margaret had learnt the times of theiringress and egress, she was very unfortunate in constantly falling inwith them. they came rushing along, with bold, fearless faces, and loudlaughs and jests, particularly aimed at all those who appeared to beabove them in rank or station. the tones of their unrestrained voices,and their carelessness of all common rules of street politeness,frightened margaret a little at first. the girls, with their rough, but notunfriendly freedom, would comment on her dress, even touch her shawlor gown to ascertain the exact material; nay, once or twice she wasasked questions relative to some article which they particularlyadmired. there was such a simple reliance on her womanly sympathywith their love of dress, and on her kindliness, that she gladly replied tothese inquiries, as soon as she understood them; and half smiled back attheir remarks. she did not mind meeting any number of girls, loudspoken and boisterous though they might be. but she alternatelydreaded and fired up against the workmen, who commented not on herdress, but on her looks, in the same open fearless manner. she, who hadhitherto felt that even the most refined remark on her personalappearance was an impertinence, had to endure undisguised admirationfrom these outspoken men. but the very out-spokenness marked theirinnocence of any intention to hurt her delicacy, as she would haveperceived if she had been less frightened by the disorderly tumult. outof her fright came a flash of indignation which made her face scarlet,and her dark eyes gather flame, as she heard some of their speeches. yetthere were other sayings of theirs, which, when she reached the quietsafety of home, amused her even while they irritated her.
　　for instance, one day, after she had passed a number of men, several ofwhom had paid her the not unusual compliment of wishing she wastheir sweetheart, one of the lingerers added, \"your bonny face, my lass,makes the day look brighter.\" and another day, as she wasunconsciously smiling at some passing thought, she was addressed by apoorly-dressed, middle-aged workman, with \"you may well smile, my
　　lass; many a one would smile to have such a bonny face.\" this manlooked so careworn that margaret could not help giving him ananswering smile, glad to think that her looks, such as they were, shouldhave had the power to call up a pleasant thought. he seemed tounderstand her acknowledging glance, and a silent recognition wasestablished between them whenever the chances of the day broughtthem across each other s paths. they had never exchanged a word;nothing had been said but that first compliment; yet somehow margaretlooked upon this man with more interest than upon any one else inmilton. once or twice, on sundays, she saw him walking with a girl,evidently his daughter, and, if possible, still more unhealthy than he washimself.
　　one day margaret and her father had been as far as the fields that layaround the town; it was early spring, and she had gathered some of thehedge and ditch flowers, dog-violets, lesser celandines, and the like,with an unspoken lament in her heart for the sweet profusion of thesouth. her father had left her to go into milton upon some business;and on the road home she met her humble friends. the girl lookedwistfully at the flowers, and, acting on a sudden impulse, margaretoffered them to her. her pale blue eyes lightened up as she took them,and her father spoke for her.
　　\"thank yo, miss. bessy\"ll think a deal o\" them flowers; that hoo will; andi shall think a deal o\" yor kindness. yo\"re not of this country, i reckon?\"
　　\"no!\" said margaret, half sighing. \"i come from the south--fromhampshire,\" she continued, a little afraid of wounding his consciousnessof ignorance, if she used a name which he did not understand.
　　\"that\"s beyond london, i reckon? and i come fro\" burnley-ways, andforty mile to th\" north. and yet, yo see, north and south has both metand made kind o\" friends in this big smoky place.\"
　　margaret had slackened her pace to walk alongside of the man and hisdaughter, whose steps were regulated by the feebleness of the latter. shenow spoke to the girl, and there was a sound of tender pity in the toneof her voice as she did so that went right to the heart of the father.
　　\"i\"m afraid you are not very strong.\"
　　\"no,\" said the girl, \"nor never will be.\"
　　\"spring is coming,\" said margaret, as if to suggest pleasant, hopefulthoughts.
　　\"spring nor summer will do me good,\" said the girl quietly.
　　margaret looked up at the man, almost expecting some contradictionfrom him, or at least some remark that would modify his daughter\"sutter hopelessness. but, instead, he added-\"
　　i\"m afeared hoo speaks truth. i\"m afeared hoo\"s too far gone in a waste.\"
　　\"i shall have a spring where i\"m boun to, and flowers, and amaranths,
　　and shining robes besides.\"
　　\"poor lass, poor lass!\" said her father in a low tone. \"i\"m none so sure o\"
　　that; but it\"s a comfort to thee, poor lass, poor lass. poor father! it\"ll besoon.\"
　　margaret was shocked by his words--shocked but not repelled; ratherattracted and interested.
　　\"where do you live? i think we must be neighbours, we meet so oftenon this road.\"
　　\"we put up at nine frances street, second turn to th\" left at after yo\"vepast th\" goulden dragon.\"
　　\"and your name? i must not forget that.\"
　　\"i\"m none ashamed o\" my name. it\"s nicholas higgins. hoo\"s calledbessy higgins. whatten yo\" asking for?\"
　　margaret was surprised at this last question, for at helstone it wouldhave been an understood thing, after the inquiries she had made, thatshe intended to come and call upon any poor neighbour whose nameand habitation she had asked for.
　　\"i thought--i meant to come and see you.\" she suddenly felt rather shy ofoffering the visit, without having any reason to give for her wish tomake it\" beyond a kindly interest in a stranger. it seemed all at once totake the shape of an impertinence on her part; she read this meaning tooin the man\"s eyes.
　　\"i\"m none so fond of having strange folk in my house.\" but thenrelenting, as he saw her heightened colour, he added, \"yo\"re a foreigner,as one may say, and maybe don\"t know many folk here, and yo\"ve givenmy wench here flowers out of yo\"r own hand;--yo may come if yo like.\"
　　margaret was half-amused, half-nettled at this answer. she was not sureif she would go where permission was given so like a favour conferred.
　　but when they came to the town into frances street, the girl stopped aminute, and said,\"yo\"ll not forget yo\"re to come and see us.\"
　　\"aye, aye,\" said the father, impatiently, \"hoo\"ll come. hoo\"s a bit set upnow, because hoo thinks i might ha\" spoken more civilly; but hoo\"llthink better on it, and come. i can read her proud bonny face like abook. come along, bess; there\"s the mill bell ringing.\"
　　margaret went home, wondering at her new friends, and smiling at theman\"s insight into what had been passing in her mind. from that daymilton became a brighter place to her. it was not the long, bleak sunnydays of spring, nor yet was it that time was reconciling her to the townof her habitation. it was that in it she had found a human interest.
www.xiabook.com&下&书_ 网



第31章 CHAPTER IX DRESSING FOR TEA (1)


　　\"let china\"s earth, enrich\"d with colour\"d stains,pencil\"d with gold, and streak\"d with azure veinsthe grateful flavour of the indian leaf,or mocho\"s sunburnt berry glad receive.
　　mrs. barbauld.
　　the day after this meeting with higgins and his daughter, mr. halecame upstairs into the little drawing-room at an unusual hour. he wentup to different objects in the room, as if examining them, but margaretsaw that it was merely a nervous trick--a way of putting off somethinghe wished, yet feared to say. out it came at last-\"
　　my dear! i\"ve asked mr. thornton to come to tea to-night.\"
　　mrs. hale was leaning back in her easy chair, with her eyes shut, and anexpression of pain on her face which had become habitual to her of late.
　　but she roused up into querulousness at this speech of her husband\"s.
　　\"mr. thornton!--and to-night! what in the world does the man want tocome here for? and dixon is washing my muslins and laces, and thereis no soft water with these horrid east winds, which i suppose we shallhave all the year round in milton.\"
　　\"the wind is veering round, my dear,\" said mr. hale, looking out at thesmoke, which drifted right from the east, only he did not yet understandthe points of the compass, and rather arranged them ad libitum,according to circumstances.
　　\"don\"t tell me!\" said mrs. hale, shuddering up, and wrapping her shawlabout her still more closely. \"but, east or west wind, i suppose this mancomes.\"
　　\"oh, mamma, that shows you never saw mr. thornton. he looks like aperson who would enjoy battling with every adverse thing he couldmeet with--enemies, winds, or circumstances. the more it rains andblows, the more certain we are to have him. but i\"ll go and help dixon.
　　i\"m getting to be a famous clear-starcher. and he won\"t want anyamusement beyond talking to papa. papa, i am really longing to see thepythias to your damon. you know i never saw him but once, and thenwe were so puzzled to know what to say to each other that we did notget on particularly well.\"
　　\"i don\"t know that you would ever like him, or think him agreeable,margaret. he is not a lady\"s man.\"
　　margaret wreathed her throat in a scornful curve.
　　\"i don\"t particularly admire ladies\" men, papa. but mr. thornton comeshere as your friend--as one who has appreciated you\"-\"
　　the only person in milton,\" said mrs. hale.
　　\"so we will give him a welcome, and some cocoa-nut cakes. dixon willbe flattered if we ask her to make some; and i will undertake to ironyour caps, mamma.\"
　　many a time that morning did margaret wish mr. thornton far enoughaway. she had planned other employments for herself: a letter to edith,a good piece of dante, a visit to the higginses. but, instead, she ironedaway, listening to dixon\"s complaints, and only hoping that by anexcess of sympathy she might prevent her from carrying the recital ofher sorrows to mrs. hale. every now and then, margaret had to remindherself of her father\"s regard for mr. thornton, to subdue the irritationof weariness that was stealing over her, and bringing on one of the badheadaches to which she had lately become liable. she could hardlyspeak when she sat down at last, and told her mother that she was nolonger peggy the laundry-maid, but margaret hale the lady. she meantthis speech for a little joke, and was vexed enough with her busy tonguewhen she found her mother taking it seriously.
　　\"yes! if any one had told me, when i was miss beresford, and one of thebelles of the county, that a child of mine would have to stand half a day,in a little poky kitchen, working away like any servant, that we mightprepare properly for the reception of a tradesman, and that thistradesman should be the only\"-\"
www.56ｗen．ＣＯＭ下~书~网



第32章 CHAPTER IX DRESSING FOR TEA (2)


　　oh, mamma!\" said margaret, lifting herself up, \"don\"t punish me so for acareless speech. i don\"t mind ironing, or any kind of work, for you andpapa. i am myself a born and bred lady through it all, even though itcomes to scouring a floor, or washing dishes. i am tired now, just for alittle while; but in half an hour i shall be ready to do the same overagain. and as to mr. thornton\"s being in trade, why he can\"t help thatnow, poor fellow. i don\"t suppose his education would fit him for muchelse.\" margaret lifted herself slowly up, and went to her own room; forjust now she could not bear much more.
　　in mr. thornton\"s house, at this very same time, a similar, yet different,scene was going on. a large-boned lady, long past middle age, sat atwork in a grim handsomely-furnished dining-room. her features, likeher frame, were strong and massive, rather than heavy. her face movedslowly from one decided expression to another equally decided. therewas no great variety in her countenance; but those who looked at itonce, generally looked at it again; even the passers-by in the street, half-turned their heads to gaze an instant longer at the firm, severe, dignifiedwoman, who never gave way in street-courtesy, or paused in herstraight-onward course to the clearly-defined end which she proposed to
　　herself.
　　she was handsomely dressed in stout black silk, of which not a threadwas worn or discoloured. she was mending a large long table-cloth ofthe finest texture, holding it up against the light occasionally to discoverthin places, which required her delicate care. there was not a bookabout in the room, with the exception of matthew henry\"s biblecommentaries, six volumes of which lay in the centre of the massiveside-board, flanked by a tea-urn on one side, and a lamp on the other. insome remote apartment, there was exercise upon the piano going on.
　　some one was practising up a morceau de salon, playing it very rapidly;every third note, on an average, being either indistinct, or whollymissed out, and the loud chords at the end being half of them false, butnot the less satisfactory to the performer. mrs. thornton heard a step,like her own in its decisive character, pass the dining-room door.
　　\"john! is that you?\"
　　her son opened the door and showed himself.
　　\"what has brought you home so early? i thought you were going to teawith that friend of mr. bell\"s; that mr. hale.\"
　　\"so i am, mother; i am come home to dress!\"
　　\"dress! humph! when i was a girl, young men were satisfied withdressing once in a day. why should you dress to go and take a cup oftea with an old parson?\"
　　\"mr. hale is a gentleman, and his wife and daughter are ladies.\"
　　\"wife and daughter! do they teach too? what do they do? you havenever mentioned them.\"
　　\"no! mother, because i have never seen mrs. hale; i have only seenmiss hale for half an hour.\"
　　\"take care you don\"t get caught by a penniless girl, john.\"
　　\"i am not easily caught, mother, as i think you know. but i must nothave miss hale spoken of in that way, which, you know, is offensive tome. i never was aware of any young lady trying to catch me yet, nor doi believe that any one has ever given themselves that useless trouble.\"
　　mrs. thornton did not choose to yield the point to her son; or else shehad, in general, pride enough for her sex.
　　\"well! i only say, take care. perhaps our milton girls have too muchspirit and good feeling to go angling after husbands; but this miss halecomes out of the aristocratic counties, where, if all tales be true, richhusbands are reckoned prizes.\"
　　mr. thornton\"s brow contracted, and he came a step forward into theroom.
　　\"mother\" (with a short scornful laugh), \"you will make me confess. theonly time i saw miss hale, she treated me with a haughty civility whichhad a strong flavour of contempt in it. she held herself aloof from me as
　　if she had been a queen, and i her humble, unwashed vassal. be easy,mother.\"
　　\"no! i am not easy, nor content either. what business had she, arenegade clergyman\"s daughter, to turn up her nose at you! i woulddress for none of them--a saucy set! if i were you.\" as he was leavingthe room, he said:-\"
　　mr. hale is good, and gentle, and learned. he is not saucy. as for mrs.
　　hale, i will tell you what she is like to-night, if you care to hear.\" heshut the door and was gone.
　　\"despise my son! treat him as her vassal, indeed! humph! i should liketo know where she could find such another! boy and man, he\"s thenoblest, stoutest heart i ever knew. i don\"t care if i am his mother; i cansee what\"s what, and not be blind. i know what fanny is; and i knowwhat john is. despise him! i hate her!\"
www.xiabook.comwww.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ



第33章 CHAPTER X WROUGHT IRON AND GOLD (1)


　　\"we are the trees whom shaking fastens more.\"
　　george herbert.
　　mr. thornton left the house without coming into the dining-room again.
　　he was rather late, and walked rapidly out to crampton. he wasanxious not to slight his new friend by any disrespectful unpunctuality.
　　the church-clock struck half-past seven as he stood at the door awaitingdixon\"s slow movements; always doubly tardy when she had to degradeherself by answering the door-bell. he was ushered into the littledrawing-room, and kindly greeted by mr. hale, who led him up to hiswife, whose pale face, and shawl-draped figure made a silent excuse forthe cold languor of her greeting. margaret was lighting the lamp whenhe entered, for the darkness was coming on. the lamp threw a prettylight into the centre of the dusky room, from which, with countryhabits, they did not exclude the night-skies, and the outer darkness ofair. somehow, that room contrasted itself with the one he had lately left;handsome, ponderous, with no sign of feminine habitation, except in theone spot where his mother sate, and no convenience for any otheremployment than eating and drinking. to be sure, it was a dining-room;his mother preferred to sit in it; and her will was a household law. butthe drawing-room was not like this. it was twice--twenty times as fine;not one quarter as comfortable. here were no mirrors, not even a scrapof glass to reflect the light, and answer the same purpose as water in a
　　landscape; no gilding; a warm, sober breadth of colouring, well relievedby the dear old helstone chintz-curtains and chair covers. an opendavenport stood in the window opposite the door; in the other there wasa stand, with a tall white china vase, from which drooped wreaths ofenglish ivy, pale-green birch, and copper-coloured beech-leaves. prettybaskets of work stood about in different places: and books, not cared foron account of their binding solely, lay on one table, as if recently putdown. behind the door was another table, decked out for tea, with awhite tablecloth, on which flourished the cocoa-nut cakes, and a basketpiled with oranges and ruddy american apples, heaped on leaves.
　　it appeared to mr. thornton that all these graceful cares were habitualto the family; and especially of a piece with margaret. she stood by thetea-table in a light-coloured muslin gown, which had a good deal ofpink about it. she looked as if she was not attending to theconversation, but solely busy with the tea-cups, among which her roundivory hands moved with pretty, noiseless, daintiness. she had a braceleton one taper arm, which would fall down over her round wrist. mr.
　　thornton watched the replacing of this troublesome ornament with farmore attention than he listened to her father. it seemed as if it fascinatedhim to see her push it up impatiently, until it tightened her soft flesh;and then to mark the loosening--the fall. he could almost haveexclaimed--\"there it goes, again!\" there was so little left to be doneafter he arrived at the preparation for tea, that he was almost sorry theobligation of eating and drinking came so soon to prevent his watchingmargaret. she handed him his cup of tea with the proud air of anunwilling slave; but her eye caught the moment when he was ready foranother cup; and he almost longed to ask her to do for him what he sawher compelled to do for her father, who took her little finger and thumbin his masculine hand, and made them serve as sugar-tongs. mr.
　　thornton saw her beautiful eyes lifted to her father, full of light, half-laughter and half-love, as this bit of pantomime went on between thetwo, unobserved, as they fancied, by any. margaret\"s head still ached, asthe paleness of her complexion, and her silence might have testified; butshe was resolved to throw herself into the breach, if there was any longuntoward pause, rather than that her father\"s friend, pupil, and guestshould have cause to think himself in any way neglected. but theconversation went on; and margaret drew into a corner, near hermother, with her work, after the tea-things were taken away; and feltthat she might let her thoughts roam, without fear of being suddenlywanted to fill up a gap.
　　mr. thornton and mr. hale were both absorbed in the continuation ofsome subject which had been started at their last meeting. margaret wasrecalled to a sense of the present by some trivial, low-spoken remark of
　　her mother\"s; and on suddenly looking up from her work, her eye wascaught by the difference of outward appearance between her father andmr. thornton, as betokening such distinctly opposite natures. her fatherwas of slight figure, which made him appear taller than he really was,when not contrasted, as at this time, with the tall, massive frame ofanother. the lines in her father\"s face were soft and waving, with afrequent undulating kind of trembling movement passing over them,showing every fluctuating emotion; the eyelids were large and arched,giving to the eyes a peculiar languid beauty which was almost feminine.
　　the brows were finely arched, but were, by the very size of the dreamylids, raised to a considerable distance from the eyes. now, in mr.
　　thornton\"s face the straight brows fell low over the clear, deep-setearnest eyes, which, without being unpleasantly sharp, seemed intentenough to penetrate into the very heart and core of what he was lookingat. the lines in the face were few but firm, as if they were carved inmarble, and lay principally about the lips, which were slightlycompressed over a set of teeth so faultless and beautiful as to give theeffect of sudden sunlight when the rare bright smile, coming in aninstant and shining out of the eyes, changed the whole look from thesevere and resolved expression of a man ready to do and dareeverything, to the keen honest enjoyment of the moment, which isseldom shown so fearlessly and instantaneously except by children.
　　margaret liked this smile; it was the first thing she had admired in thisnew friend of her father\"s; and the opposition of character, shown in allthese details of appearance she had just been noticing, seemed toexplain the attraction they evidently felt towards each other.
 



第34章 CHAPTER X WROUGHT IRON AND GOLD (2)


　　she rearranged her mother\"s worsted-work, and fell back into her ownthoughts--as completely forgotten by mr. thornton as if she had notbeen in the room, so thoroughly was he occupied in explaining to mr.
　　hale the magnificent power, yet delicate adjustment of the might of thesteam-hammer, which was recalling to mr. hale some of the wonderfulstories of subservient genii in the arabian nights--one momentstretching from earth to sky and filling all the width of the horizon, atthe next obediently compressed into a vase small enough to be borne inthe hand of a child.
　　\"and this imagination of power, this practical realisation of a giganticthought, came out of one man\"s brain in our good town. that very manhas it within him to mount, step by step, on each wonder he achieves tohigher marvels still. and i\"ll be bound to say, we have many among uswho, if he were gone, could spring into the breach and carry on the warwhich compels, and shall compel, all material power to yield toscience.\"
　　\"your boast reminds me of the old lines-
　　\"i\"ve a hundred captains in england,\" he said,\"as good as ever was he.\"\"
　　at her father\"s quotation margaret looked suddenly up, with inquiringwonder in her eyes. how in the world had they got from cog-wheels tochevy chace?
　　\"it is no boast of mine,\" replied mr. thornton; \"it is plain matter-of-fact. iwon\"t deny that i am proud of belonging to a town--or perhaps i shouldrather say a district--the necessities of which give birth to such grandeurof conception. i would rather be a man toiling, suffering--nay, failingand successless--here, than lead a dull prosperous life in the old worngrooves of what you call more aristocratic society down in the south,with their slow days of careless ease. one may be clogged with honeyand unable to rise and fly.\"
　　\"you are mistaken,\" said margaret, roused by the aspersion on herbeloved south to a fond vehemence of defence, that brought the colourinto her cheeks and the angry tears into her eyes. \"you do not knowanything about the south. if there is less adventure or less progress--isuppose i must not say less excitement--from the gambling spirit oftrade, which seems requisite to force out these wonderful inventions,there is less suffering also. i see men h ere going about in the streetswho look ground down by some pinching sorrow or care--who are notonly sufferers but haters. now, in the south we have our poor, but thereis not that terrible expression in their countenances of a sullen sense ofinjustice which i see here. you do not know the south, mr. thornton,\"
　　she concluded, collapsing into a determined silence, and angry withherself for having said so much.
　　\"and may i say you do not know the north?\" asked he, with aninexpressible gentleness in his tone, as he saw that he had really hurther. she continued resolutely silent; yearning after the lovely haunts shehad left far away in hampshire, with a passionate longing that made herfeel her voice would be unsteady and trembling if she spoke.
　　\"at any rate, mr. thornton,\" said mrs. hale, \"you will allow that miltonis a much more smoky, dirty town than you will ever meet with in thesouth.\"
　　\"i\"m afraid i must give up its cleanliness,\" said mr. thornton, with thequick gleaming smile. \"but we are bidden by parliament to burn ourown smoke; so i suppose, like good little children, we shall do as we arebid--some time.\"
　　\"but i think you told me you had altered your chimneys so as toconsume the smoke, did you not?\" asked mr. hale.
　　\"mine were altered by my own will, before parliament meddled with theaffair. it was an immediate outlay, but it repays me in the saving ofcoal. i\"m not sure whether i should have done it, if i had waited until the
　　act was passed. at any rate, i should have waited to be informed againstand fined, and given all the trouble in yielding that i legally could. butall laws which depend for their enforcement upon informers and fines,become inert from the odiousness of the machinery. i doubt if there hasbeen a chimney in milton informed against for five years past, althoughsome are constantly sending out one-third of their coal in what is calledhere unparliamentary smoke.\"
　　\"i only know it is impossible to keep the muslin blinds clean here abovea week together; and at helstone we have had them up for a month ormore, and they have not looked dirty at the end of that time. and as forhands--margaret, how many times did you say you had washed yourhands this morning before twelve o\"clock? three times, was it not?\"
　　\"yes, mamma.\"
　　\"you seem to have a strong objection to acts of parliament and alllegislation affecting your mode of management down here at milton,\"
　　said mr. hale.
　　\"yes, i have; and many others have as well. and with justice, i think.
　　the whole machinery--i don\"t mean the wood and iron machinery now-ofthe cotton trade is so new that it is no wonder if it does not work wellin every part all at once. seventy years ago what was it? and now whatis it not? raw, crude materials came together; men of the same level, asregarded education and station, took suddenly the different positions ofmasters and men, owing to the motherwit, as regarded opportunities andprobabilities, which distinguished some, and made them far-seeing as towhat great future lay concealed in that rude model of sir richardarkwright\"s. the rapid development of what might be called a newtrade, gave those early masters enormous power of wealth andcommand. i don\"t mean merely over the workmen; i mean overpurchasers--over the whole world\"s market. why, i may give you, as aninstance, an advertisement, inserted not fifty years ago in a miltonpaper, that so-and-so (one of the half-dozen calico-printers of the time)would close his warehouse at noon each day; therefore, that allpurchasers must come before that hour. fancy a man dictating in thismanner the time when he would sell and when he would not sell. now,i believe, if a good customer chose to come at midnight, i should getup, and stand hat in hand to receive his orders.\"
　　margaret\"s lip curled, but somehow she was compelled to listen; shecould no longer abstract herself in her own thoughts.
&下&书_ 网



第35章 CHAPTER X WROUGHT IRON AND GOLD (3)


　　\"i only name such things to show what almost unlimited power themanufacturers had about the beginning of this century. the men wererendered dizzy by it. because a man was successful in his ventures,there was no reason that in all other things his mind should be well-balanced. on the contrary, his sense of justice, and his simplicity, were
　　often utterly smothered under the glut of wealth that came down uponhim; and they tell strange tales of the wild extravagance of livingindulged in on gala-days by those early cotton-lords. there can be nodoubt, too, of the tyranny they exercised over their work-people. youknow the proverb, mr. hale, \"set a beggar on horseback, and he\"ll rideto the devil,\"--well, some of these early manufacturers did ride to thedevil in a magnificent style--crushing human bone and flesh under theirhorses\" hoofs without remorse. but by-and-by came a re-action, therewere more factories, more masters; more men were wanted. the powerof masters and men became more evenly balanced; and now the battle ispretty fairly waged between us. we will hardly submit to the decisionof an umpire, much less to the interference of a meddler with only asmattering of the knowledge of the real facts of the case, even thoughthat meddler be called the high court of parliament.
　　\"is there necessity for calling it a battle between the two classes?\" askedmr. hale. \"i know, from your using the term, it is one which gives a trueidea of the real state of things to your mind.\"
　　\"it is true; and i believe it to be as much a necessity as that prudentwisdom and good conduct are always opposed to, and doing battle withignorance and improvidence. it is one of the great beauties of oursystem, that a working-man may raise himself into the power andposition of a master by his own exertions and behaviour; that, in fact,every one who rules himself to decency and sobriety of conduct, andattention to his duties, comes over to our ranks; it may not be always asa master, but as an over-looker, a cashier, a book-keeper, a clerk, one onthe side of authority and order.\"
　　\"you consider all who are unsuccessful in raising themselves in theworld, from whatever cause, as your enemies, then, if i under-stand yourightly,\" said margaret\" in a clear, cold voice.
　　\"as their own enemies, certainly,\" said he, quickly, not a little piqued bythe haughty disapproval her form of expression and tone of speakingimplied. but, in a moment, his straightforward honesty made him feelthat his words were but a poor and quibbling answer to what she hadsaid; and, be she as scornful as she liked, it was a duty he owed tohimself to explain, as truly as he could, what he did mean. yet it wasvery difficult to separate her interpretation, and keep it distinct from hismeaning. he could best have illustrated what he wanted to say bytelling them something of his own life; but was it not too personal asubject to speak about to strangers ? still, it was the simplestraightforward way of explaining his meaning; so, putting aside thetouch of shyness that brought a momentary flush of colour into his darkcheek, he said:
　　\"i am not speaking without book. sixteen years ago, my father died
　　under very miserable circumstances. i was taken from school, and hadto become a man (as well as i could) in a few days. i had such a motheras few are blest with; a woman of strong power, and firm resolve. wewent into a small country town, where living was cheaper than inmilton, and where i got employment in a draper\"s shop (a capital place,by the way, for obtaining a knowledge of goods). week by week ourincome came to fifteen shillings, out of which three people had to bekept. my mother managed so that i put by three out of these fifteenshillings regularly. this made the beginning; this taught me self-denial.
　　now that i am able to afford my mother such comforts as her age, ratherthan her own wish, requires, i thank her silently on each occasion forthe early training she gave me. now when i feel that in my own case itis no good luck, nor merit, nor talent,--but simply the habits of lifewhich taught me to despise indulgences not thoroughly earned,--indeed,never to think twice about them,--i believe that this suffering, whichmiss hale says is impressed on the countenances of the people ofmilton, is but the natural punishment of dishonestly-enjoyed pleasure,at some former period of their lives. i do not look on self-indulgent,sensual people as worthy of my hatred; i simply look upon them withcontempt for their poorness of character.\"
　　\"but you have had the rudiments of a good education,\" remarked mr.
　　hale. \"the quick zest with which you are now reading homer, showsme that you do not come to it as an unknown book; you have read itbefore, and are only recalling your old knowledge.\"
　　\"that is true,--i had blundered along it at school; i dare say, i was evenconsidered a pretty fair classic in those days, though my latin andgreek have slipt away from me since. but i ask you, what preparationthey were for such a life as i had to lead? none at all. utterly none atall. on the point of education, any man who can read and write startsfair with me in the amount of really useful knowledge that i had at thattime.\"
　　\"well! i don\"t agree with you. but there i am perhaps somewhat of apedant. did not the recollection of the heroic simplicity of the homericlife nerve you up?\"
　　\"not one bit!\" exclaimed mr. thornton, laughing. \"i was too busy tothink about any dead people, with the living pressing alongside of me,neck to neck, in the struggle for bread. now that i have my mother safein the quiet peace that becomes her age, and duly rewards her formerexertions, i can turn to all that old narration and thoroughly enjoy it.\"
　　\"i dare say, my remark came from the professional feeling of there beingnothing like leather,\" replied mr. hale.
　　when mr. thornton rose up to go away, after shaking hands with mr.
　　and mrs. hale, he made an advance to margaret to wish her good-bye in
　　a similar manner. it was the frank familiar custom of the place; butmargaret was not prepared for it. she simply bowed her farewell;although the instant she saw the hand, half put out, quickly drawn back,she was sorry she had not been aware of the intention. mr. thornton,however, knew nothing of her sorrow, and, drawing himself up to hisfull height, walked off, muttering as he left the house-\"
　　a more proud, disagreeable girl i never saw. even her great beauty isblotted out of one\"s memory by her scornful ways.\"




第36章 CHAPTER XI FIRST IMPRESSIONS (1)


　　\"there\"s iron, they say, in all our blood,and a grain or two perhaps is good;but his, he makes me harshly feel,has got a little too much of steel.\"
　　anon.
　　\"margaret!\" said mr. hale, as he returned from showing his guestdownstairs; \"i could not help watching your face with some anxiety,when mr. thornton made his confession of having been a shop-boy. iknew it all along from mr. bell; so i was aware of what was coming;but i half expected to see you get up and leave the room.\"
　　\"oh, papa! you don\"t mean that you thought me so silly? i really likedthat account of himself better than anything else he said. everythingelse revolted me, from its hardness; but he spoke about himself sosimply--with so little of the pretence that makes the vulgarity of shop-people, and with such tender respect for his mother, that i was lesslikely to leave the room then than when he was boasting about milton,as if there was not such another place in the world; or quietly professingto despise people for careless, wasteful improvidence, without everseeming to think it his duty to try to make them different,--to give themanything of the training which his mother gave him, and to which heevidently owes his position, whatever that may be. no! his statement ofhaving been a shop-boy was the thing i liked best of all.\"
　　\"i am surprised at you, margaret,\" said her mother. \"you who werealways accusing people of being shoppy at helstone! i don\"t i think, mr.
　　hale, you have done quite right in introducing such a person to us
　　without telling us what he had been. i really was very much afraid ofshowing him how much shocked i was at some parts of what he said.
　　his father \"dying in miserable circumstances.\" why it might have beenin the workhouse.\"
　　\"i am not sure if it was not worse than being in the workhouse,\" repliedher husband. \"i heard a good deal of his previous life from mr. bellbefore we came here; and as he has told you a part, i will fill up what heleft out. his father speculated wildly, failed, and then killed himself,because he could not bear the disgrace. all his former friends shrunkfrom the disclosures that had to be made of his dishonest gambling-wild,hopeless struggles, made with other people\"s money, to regain hisown moderate portion of wealth. no one came forwards to help themother and this boy. there was another child, i believe, a girl; tooyoung to earn money, but of course she had to be kept. at least, nofriend came forwards immediately, and mrs. thornton is not one, ifancy, to wait till tardy kindness comes to find her out. so they leftmilton. i knew he had gone into a shop, and that his earnings, withsome fragment of property secured to his mother, had been made tokeep them for a long time. mr. bell said they absolutely lived uponwater-porridge for years--how, he did not know; but long after thecreditors had given up hope of any payment of old mr. thornton\"s debts(if, indeed, they ever had hoped at all about it, after his suicide,) thisyoung man returned to milton, and went quietly round to each creditor,paying him the first instalment of the money owing to him. no noise-nogathering together of creditors--it was done very silently and quietly,but all was paid at last; helped on materially by the circumstance of oneof the creditors, a crabbed old fellow (mr. bell says), taking in mr.
　　thornton as a kind of partner.\"
　　\"that really is fine,\" said margaret. \"what a pity such a nature should betainted by his position as a milton manufacturer.\"
　　\"how tainted?\" asked her father.
　　\"oh, papa, by that testing everything by the standard of wealth. when hespoke of the mechanical powers, he evidently looked upon them only asnew ways of extending trade and making money. and the poor menaround him--they were poor because they were vicious--out of the paleof his sympathies because they had not his iron nature, and thecapabilities that it gives him for being rich.\"
　　\"not vicious; he never said that. improvident and self-indulgent were hiswords.\"
　　margaret was collecting her mother\"s working materials, and preparingto go to bed. just as she was leaving the room, she hesitated--she wasinclined to make an acknowledgment which she thought would pleaseher father, but which to be full and true must include a little annoyance.
　　however, out it came.
　　\"papa, i do think mr. thornton a very remarkable man; but personally idon\"t like him at all.\"
　　\"and i do!\" said her father laughing. \"personally, as you call it, and all. idon\"t set him up for a hero, or anything of that kind. but good night,child. your mother looks sadly tired to-night, margaret.\"
　　margaret had noticed her mother\"s jaded appearance with anxiety forsome time past, and this remark of her father\"s sent her up to bed with adim fear lying like a weight on her heart. the life in milton was sodifferent from what mrs. hale had been accustomed to live in helstone,in and out perpetually into the fresh and open air; the air itself was sodifferent, deprived of all revivifying principle as it seemed to be here;the domestic worries pressed so very closely, and in so new and sordida form, upon all the women in the family, that there was good reason tofear that her mother\"s health might be becoming seriously affected.
　　there were several other signs of something wrong about mrs. hale.
  #下!书! 网



第37章 CHAPTER XI FIRST IMPRESSIONS (2)


　　she and dixon held mysterious consultations in her bedroom, fromwhich dixon would come out crying and cross, as was her custom whenany distress of her mistress called upon her sympathy. once margarethad gone into the chamber soon after dixon left it, and found hermother on her knees, and as margaret stole out she caught a few words,which were evidently a prayer for strength and patience to enduresevere bodily suffering. margaret yearned to re-unite the bond ofintimate confidence which had been broken by her long residence at heraunt shaw\"s, and strove by gentle caresses and softened words to creepinto the warmest place in her mother\"s heart. but though she receivedcaresses and fond words back again, in such profusion as would havegladdened her formerly, yet she felt that there was a secret withheldfrom her, and she believed it bore serious reference to her mother\"shealth. she lay awake very long this night, planning how to lessen theevil influence of their milton life on her mother. a servant to givedixon permanent assistance should be got, if she gave up her wholetime to the search; and then, at any rate, her mother might have all thepersonal attention she required, and had been accustomed to her wholelife.
　　visiting register offices, seeing all manner of unlikely people, and veryfew in the least likely, absorbed margaret\"s time and thoughts forseveral days. one afternoon she met bessy higgins in the street, andstopped to speak to her.
　　\"well, bessy, how are you? better, i hope, now the wind has changed.\"
　　\"better and not better, if yo\" know what that means.\"
　　\"not exactly,\" replied margaret, smiling.
　　\"i\"m better in not being torn to pieces by coughing o\"nights, but i\"m
　　weary and tired o\" milton, and longing to get away to the land o\"
　　beulah; and when i think i\"m farther and farther off, my heart sinks, andi\"m no better; i\"m worse.\"
　　margaret turned round to walk alongside of the girl in her feebleprogress homeward. but for a minute or two she did not speak. at lastshe said in a low voice,\"bessy, do you wish to die?\" for she shrank from death herself, with allthe clinging to life so natural to the young and healthy.
　　bessy was silent in her turn for a minute or two. then she replied,\"if yo\"d led the life i have, and getten as weary of it as i have, andthought at times, \"maybe it\"ll last for fifty or sixty years--it does wi\"
　　some,\"--and got dizzy and dazed, and sick, as each of them sixty yearsseemed to spin about me, and mock me with its length of hours andminutes, and endless bits o\" time--oh, wench! i tell thee thou\"d been gladenough when th\" doctor said he feared thou\"d never see another winter.\"
　　\"why, bessy, what kind of a life has yours been?\"
　　\"nought worse than many others, i reckon. only i fretted again it, andthey didn\"t.\"
　　\"but what was it? you know, i\"m a stranger here, so perhaps i\"m not soquick at understanding what you mean as if i\"d lived all my life atmilton.\"
　　\"if yo\"d ha\" come to our house when yo\" said yo\" would, i could maybeha\" told you. but father says yo\"re just like th\" rest on \"em; it\"s out o\" sightout o\" mind wi\" you.\"
　　\"i don\"t know who the rest are; and i\"ve been very busy; and, to tell thetruth, i had forgotten my promise--\"
　　\"yo\" offered it! we asked none of it.\"
　　\"i had forgotten what i said for the time,\" continued margaret quietly. \"ishould have thought of it again when i was less busy. may i go withyou now?\"
　　bessy gave a quick glance at margaret\"s face, to see if the wishexpressed was really felt. the sharpness in her eye turned to a wistfullonging as she met margaret\"s soft and friendly gaze.
　　\"i ha\" none so many to care for me; if yo\" care yo\" may come.
　　so they walked on together in silence. as they turned up into a smallcourt, opening out of a squalid street, bessy said,\"yo\"ll not be daunted if father\"s at home, and speaks a bit gruffish atfirst. he took a mind to ye, yo\" see, and he thought a deal o\" yourcoming to see us; and just because he liked yo\" he were vexed and putabout.\"
　　\"don\"t fear, bessy.\"
　　but nicholas was not at home when they entered. a great slatternly girl,not so old as bessy, but taller and stronger, was busy at the wash-tub,
　　knocking about the furniture in a rough capable way, but altogethermaking so much noise that margaret shrunk, out of sympathy with poorbessy, who had sat down on the first chair, as if completely tired outwith her walk. margaret asked the sister for a cup of water, and whileshe ran to fetch it (knocking down the fire-irons, and tumbling over achair in her way), she unloosed bessy\"s bonnet strings, to relieve hercatching breath.
　　\"do you think such life as this is worth caring for?\" gasped bessy, atlast. margaret did not speak, but held the water to her lips. bessy took along and feverish draught, and then fell back and shut her eyes.
　　margaret heard her murmur to herself: \"they shall hunger no more,neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor anyheat.\"
　　margaret bent over and said, \"bessy, don\"t be impatient with your life,whatever it is--or may have been. remember who gave it you, andmade it what it is!\"
　　she was startled by hearing nicholas speak behind her; he had come inwithout her noticing him.




第38章 CHAPTER XI FIRST IMPRESSIONS (3)


　　\"now, i\"ll not have my wench preached to. she\"s bad enough as it is,with her dreams and her methodee fancies, and her visions of cities withgoulden gates and precious stones. but if it amuses her i let it abe, buti\"m none going to have more stuff poured into her.\"
　　\"but surely,\" said margaret, facing round, \"you believe in what i said,that god gave her life, and ordered what kind of life it was to be?\"
　　\"i believe what i see, and no more. that\"s what i believe, young woman.
　　i don\"t believe all i hear--no! not by a big deal. i did hear a young lassmake an ado about knowing where we lived, and coming to see us. andmy wench here thought a deal about it, and flushed up many a time,when hoo little knew as i was looking at her, at the sound of a strangestep. but hoo\"s come at last,--and hoo\"s welcome, as long as hoo\"ll keepfrom preaching on what hoo knows nought about.\"
　　bessy had been watching margaret\"s face; she half sate up to speaknow, laying her hand on margaret\"s arm with a gesture of entreaty.
　　\"don\"t be vexed wi\" him--there\"s many a one thinks like him; many andmany a one here. if yo\" could hear them speak, yo\"d not be shocked athim; he\"s a rare good man, is father--but oh!\" said she, falling back indespair, \"what he says at times makes me long to die more than ever, fori want to know so many things, and am so tossed about wi\" wonder.\"
　　\"poor wench--poor old wench,--i\"m loth to vex thee, i am; but a manmun speak out for the truth, and when i see the world going all wrong atthis time o\" day, bothering itself wi\" things it knows nought about, andleaving undone all the things that lie in disorder close at its hand--why,i say, leave a\" this talk about religion alone, and set to work on what yo\"
　　see and know. that\"s my creed. it\"s simple, and not far to fetch, nor hardto work.\"
　　but the girl only pleaded the more with margaret.
　　\"don\"t think hardly on him--he\"s a good man, he is. i sometimes think ishall be moped wi\" sorrow even in the city of god, if father is notthere.\" the feverish colour came into her cheek, and the feverish flameinto her eye. \"but you will be there, father! you shall! oh! my heart!\"
　　she put her hand to it, and became ghastly pale.
　　margaret held her in her arms, and put the weary head to rest upon herbosom. she lifted the thin soft hair from off the temples, and bathedthem with water. nicholas understood all her signs for different articleswith the quickness of love, and even the round-eyed sister moved withlaborious gentleness at margaret\"s \"hush!\" presently the spasm thatforeshadowed death had passed away, and bessy roused herself andsaid,-\"
　　i\"ll go to bed,--it\"s best place; but,\" catching at margaret\"s gown, \"yo\"llcome again,--i know yo\" will--but just say it!\"
　　\"i will come to-morrow, said margaret.
　　bessy leant back against her father, who prepared to carry her upstairs;but as margaret rose to go, he struggled to say something: \"i could wishthere were a god, if it were only to ask him to bless thee.\"
　　margaret went away very sad and thoughtful.
　　she was late for tea at home. at helstone unpunctuality at meal-timeswas a great fault in her mother\"s eyes; but now this, as well as manyother little irregularities, seemed to have lost their power of irritation,and margaret almost longed for the old complainings.
　　\"have you met with a servant, dear?\"
　　\"no, mamma; that anne buckley would never have done.\"
　　\"suppose i try,\" said mr. hale. \"everybody else has had their turn at thisgreat difficulty. now let me try. i may be the cinderella to put on theslipper after all.\"
　　margaret could hardly smile at this little joke, so oppressed was she byher visit to the higginses.
　　\"what would you do, papa? how would you set about it?\"
　　\"why, i would apply to some good house-mother to recommend me oneknown to herself or her servants.\"
　　\"very good. but we must first catch our house-mother.\"
　　\"you have caught her. or rather she is coming into the snare, and youwill catch her to-morrow, if you\"re skilful.\"
　　\"what do you mean, mr. hale?\" asked his wife, her curiosity aroused.
　　\"why, my paragon pupil (as margaret calls him), has told me that hismother intends to call on mrs. and miss hale to-morrow.\"
　　\"mrs. thornton!\" exclaimed mrs. hale.
　　\"the mother of whom he spoke to us?\" said margaret.
　　\"mrs. thornton; the only mother he has, i believe,\" said mr. halequietly.
　　\"i shall like to see her. she must be an uncommon person, her motheradded. \"perhaps she may have a relation who might suit us, and be gladof our place. she sounded to be such a careful economical person, that ishould like any one out of the same family.\"
　　\"my dear,\" said mr. hale alarmed. \"pray don\"t go off on that idea. i fancymrs. thornton is as haughty and proud in her way, as our littlemargaret here is in hers, and that she completely ignores that old timeof trial, and poverty, and economy, of which he speaks so openly. i amsure, at any rate, she would not like strangers to know anything aboutit.\"
　　\"take notice that is not my kind of haughtiness, papa, if i have any atall; which i don\"t agree to, though you\"re always accusing me of it.\"
　　\"i don\"t know positively that it is hers either; but from little things i havegathered from him, i fancy so.\"
　　they cared too little to ask in what manner her son had spoken abouther. margaret only wanted to know if she must stay in to receive thiscall, as it would prevent her going to see how bessy was, until late inthe day, since the early morning was always occupied in householdaffairs; and then she recollected that her mother must not be left to havethe whole weight of entertaining her visitor.
www.56ｗen．ＣＯＭ



第39章 CHAPTER XII MORNING CALLS (1)


　　\"well--i suppose we must.\"
　　friends in council.
　　mr. thornton had had some difficulty in working up his mother to thedesired point of civility. she did not often make calls; and when shedid, it was in heavy state that she went through her duties. her son hadgiven her a carriage; but she refused to let him keep horses for it; theywere hired for the solemn occasions, when she paid morning or eveningvisits. she had had horses for three days, not a fortnight before, and hadcomfortably \"killed off\" all her acquaintances, who might now putthemselves to trouble and expense in their turn. yet crampton was toofar off for her to walk; and she had repeatedly questioned her son as towhether his wish that she should call on the hales was strong enough tobear the expense of cab-hire. she would have been thankful if it had
　　not; for, as she said, \"she saw no use in making up friendships andintimacies with all the teachers and masters in milton; why, he wouldbe wanting her to call on fanny\"s dancing-master\"s wife, the next thing!\"
　　\"and so i would, mother, if mr. mason and his wife were friend less in astrange place, like the hales.\"
　　\"oh! you need not speak so hastily. i am going to-morrow. i onlywanted you exactly to understand about it.\"
　　\"if you are going to-morrow, i shall order horses.\"
　　\"nonsense, john. one would think you were made of money.\"
　　\"not quite, yet. but about the horses i\"m determined. the last time youwere out in a cab, you came home with a headache from the jolting.\"
　　\"i never complained of it, i\"m sure.\"
　　\"no. my mother is not given to complaints,\" said he, a little proudly. \"butso much the more i have to watch over you. now as for fanny there, alittle hardship would do her good.\"
　　\"she is not made of the same stuff as you are, john. she could not bearit.\"
　　mrs. thornton was silent after this; for her last words bore relation to asubject which mortified her. she had an unconscious contempt for aweak character; and fanny was weak in the very points in which hermother and brother were strong. mrs. thornton was not a woman muchgiven to reasoning; her quick judgment and firm resolution served herin good stead of any long arguments and discussions with herself; shefelt instinctively that nothing could strengthen fanny to endurehardships patiently, or face difficulties bravely; and though she wincedas she made this acknowledgment to herself about her daughter, it onlygave her a kind of pitying tenderness of manner towards her; much ofthe same description of demeanour with which mothers are wont totreat their weak and sickly children. a stranger, a careless observermight have considered that mrs. thornton\"s manner to her childrenbetokened far more love to fanny than to john. but such a one wouldhave been deeply mistaken. the very daringness with which mother andson spoke out unpalatable truths, the one to the other, showed a relianceon the firm centre of each other\"s souls, which the uneasy tenderness ofmrs. thornton\"s manner to her daughter, the shame with which shethought to hide the poverty of her child in all the grand qualities whichshe herself possessed unconsciously, and which she set so high a valueupon in others--this shame, i say, betrayed the want of a secure resting-place for her affection. she never called her son by any name but john;\"love,\" and \"dear,\" and such like terms, were reserved for fanny. but herheart gave thanks for him day and night; and she walked proudly amongwomen for his sake.
　　\"fanny dear i shall have horses to the carriage to-day, to go and call on
　　these hales. should not you go and see nurse? it\"s in the same direction,and she\"s always so glad to see you. you could go on there while i amat mrs. hale\"s.\"
　　\"oh! mamma, it\"s such a long way, and i am so tired.\"
　　\"with what?\" asked mrs. thornton, her brow slightly contracting.
　　\"i don\"t know--the weather, i think. it is so relaxing. couldn\"t you bringnurse here, mamma? the carriage could fetch her, and she could spendthe rest of the day here, which i know she would like.\"
　　mrs. thornton did not speak; but she laid her work on the table, andseemed to think.
　　\"it will be a long way for her to walk back at night!\" she remarked, atlast.
　　\"oh, but i will send her home in a cab. i never thought of her walking.\"
　　at this point, mr. thornton came in, just before going to the mill.
　　\"mother! i need hardly say, that if there is any little thing that couldserve mrs. hale as an invalid, you will offer it, i\"m sure.\"
　　\"if i can find it out, i will. but i have never been ill myself, so i am notmuch up to invalids\" fancies.\"
　　\"well! here is fanny then, who is seldom without an ailment. she willbe able to suggest something, perhaps--won\"t you, fan?\"
　　\"i have not always an ailment,\" said fanny, pettishly; \"and i am not goingwith mamma. i have a headache to-day, and i shan\"t go out.\"
　　mr. thornton looked annoyed. his mother\"s eyes were bent on herwork, at which she was now stitching away busily.
　　\"fanny! i wish you to go,\" said he, authoritatively. \"it will do you good,instead of harm. you will oblige me by going, without my sayinganything more about it.\"
　　he went abruptly out of the room after saying this.
　　if he had staid a minute longer, fanny would have cried at his tone ofcommand, even when he used the words, \"you will oblige me.\" as itwas, she grumbled.
　　\"john always speaks as if i fancied i was ill, and i am sure i never dofancy any such thing. who are these hales that he makes such a fussabout?\"
　　\"fanny, don\"t speak so of your brother. he has good reasons of somekind or other, or he would not wish us to go. make haste and put yourthings on.\"
　　but the little altercation between her son and her daughter did notincline mrs. thornton more favourably towards \"these hales.\" herjealous heart repeated her daughter\"s question, \"who are they, that he isso anxious we should pay them all this attention?\" it came up like aburden to a song, long after fanny had forgotten all about it in thepleasant excitement of seeing the effect of a new bonnet in the looking
　　glass.
   



第40章 CHAPTER XII MORNING CALLS (2)


　　mrs. thornton was shy. it was only of late years that she had hadleisure enough in her life to go into society; and as society she did notenjoy it. as dinner-giving, and as criticising other people\"s dinners, shetook satisfaction in it. but this going to make acquaintance withstrangers was a very different thing. she was ill at ease, and lookedmore than usually stern and forbidding as she entered the hales\" littledrawing-room.
　　margaret was busy embroidering a small piece of cambric for somelittle article of dress for edith\"s expected baby--\"flimsy, useless work,\"
　　as mrs. thornton observed to herself. she liked mrs. hale\"s doubleknitting far better; that was sensible of its kind. the room altogetherwas full of knick-knacks, which must take a long time to dust; and timeto people of limited income was money.
　　she made all these reflections as she was talking in her stately way tomrs. hale, and uttering all the stereotyped commonplaces that mostpeople can find to say with their senses blindfolded. mrs. hale wasmaking rather more exertion in her answers, captivated by some real oldlace which mrs. thornton wore; \"lace,\" as she afterwards observed todixon, \"of that old english point which has not been made for thisseventy years, and which cannot be bought. it must have been an heirloom,and shows that she had ancestors.\" so the owner of the ancestrallace became worthy of something more than the languid exertion to beagreeable to a visitor, by which mrs. hale\"s efforts at conversationwould have been otherwise bounded. and presently, margaret, rackingher brain to talk to fanny, heard her mother and mrs. thornton plungeinto the interminable subject of servants.
　　\"i suppose you are not musical,\" said fanny, \"as i see no piano.\"
　　\"i am fond of hearing good music; i cannot play well myself; and papaand mamma don\"t care much about it; so we sold our old piano when wecame here.\"
　　\"i wonder how you can exist without one. it almost seems to me anecessary of life.\"
　　\"fifteen shillings a week, and three saved out of them!\" thoughtmargaret to herself \"but she must have been very young. she probablyhas forgotten her own personal experience. but she must know of thosedays.\" margaret\"s manner had an extra tinge of coldness in it when shenext spoke.
　　\"you have good concerts here, i believe.\"
　　\"oh, yes! delicious! too crowded, that is the worst. the directors admitso indiscriminately. but one is sure to hear the newest music there. ialways have a large order to give to johnson\"s, the day after a concert.\"
　　\"do you like new music simply for its newness, then?\"
　　\"oh; one knows it is the fashion in london, or else the singers wouldnot bring it down here. you have been in london, of course.\"
　　\"yes,\" said margaret, \"i have lived there for several years.\"
　　\"oh! london and the alhambra are the two places i long to see!\"
　　\"london and the alhambra!\"
　　\"yes! ever since i read the tales of the alhambra. don\"t you knowthem?\"
　　\"i don\"t think i do. but surely, it is a very easy journey to london.\"
　　\"yes; but somehow,\" said fanny, lowering her voice, \"mamma has neverbeen to london herself, and can\"t understand my longing. she is veryproud of milton; dirty, smoky place, as i feel it to be. i believe sheadmires it the more for those very qualities.\"
　　\"if it has been mrs. thornton\"s home for some years, i can wellunderstand her loving it,\" said margaret, in her clear bell-like voice.
　　\"what are you saying about me, miss hale? may i inquire?\"
　　margaret had not the words ready for an answer to this question, whichtook her a little by surprise, so miss thornton replied:
　　\"oh, mamma! we are only trying to account for your being so fond ofmilton.\"
　　\"thank you,\" said mrs. thornton. \"i do not feel that my very naturalliking for the place where i was born and brought up,--and which hassince been my residence for some years, requires any accounting for.\"
　　margaret was vexed. as fanny had put it, it did seem as if they hadbeen impertinently discussing mrs. thornton\"s feelings; but she alsorose up against that lady\"s manner of showing that she was offended.
　　mrs. thornton went on after a moment\"s pause:
　　\"do you know anything of milton, miss hale? have you seen any of ourfactories? our magnificent warehouses?\"
　　\"no!\" said margaret. \"i have not seen anything of that description as yet.
　　then she felt that, by concealing her utter indifference to all suchplaces, she was hardly speaking with truth; so she went on:
　　\"i dare say, papa would have taken me before now if i had cared. but ireally do not find much pleasure in going over manufactories.\"
　　\"they are very curious places,\" said mrs. hale, \"but there is so muchnoise and dirt always. i remember once going in a lilac silk to seecandles made, and my gown was utterly ruined.\"
　　\"very probably,\" said mrs. thornton, in a short displeased manner. \"imerely thought, that as strangers newly come to reside in a town whichhas risen to eminence in the country, from the character and progress ofits peculiar business, you might have cared to visit some of the placeswhere it is carried on; places unique in the kingdom, i am informed. ifmiss hale changes her mind and condescends to be curious as to themanufactures of milton, i can only say i shall be glad to procure her
　　admission to print-works, or reed-making, or the more simpleoperations of spinning carried on in my son\"s mill. every improvementof machinery is, i believe, to be seen there, in its highest perfection.\"
　　\"i am so glad you don\"t like mills and manufactories, and all those kindof things,\" said fanny, in a half-whisper, as she rose to accompany hermother, who was taking leave of mrs. hale with rustling dignity.
　　\"i think i should like to know all about them, if i were you,\" repliedmargaret quietly.
　　\"fanny!\" said her mother, as they drove away, \"we will he civil to thesehales: but don\"t form one of your hasty friendships with the daughter.
　　she will do you no good, i see. the mother looks very ill, and seems anice, quiet kind of person.\"
　　\"i don\"t want to form any friendship with miss hale, mamma,\" saidfanny, pouting. \"i thought i was doing my duty by talking to her, andtrying to amuse her.\"
　　\"well! at any rate john must he satisfied now.\"




第41章 CHAPTER XIII A SOFT BREEZE IN A SULTRY PLACE (1)


　　\"that doubt and trouble, fear and pain,and anguish, all, are shadows vain,that death itself shall not remain;that weary deserts we may tread,a dreary labyrinth may thread,thro\" dark ways underground be led;yet, if we will one guide obey,the dreariest path, the darkest wayshall issue out in heavenly day;and we, on divers shores now cast,shall meet, our perilous voyage past,
　　all in our father\"s house at last!\"
　　r. c. trench.
　　margaret flew up stairs as soon as their visitors were gone, and put onher bonnet and shawl, to run and inquire how bessy higgins was, andsit with her as long as she could before dinner. as she went along thecrowded narrow streets, she felt how much of interest they had gainedby the simple fact of her having learnt to care for a dweller in them.
　　mary higgins, the slatternly younger sister, had endeavoured as well asshe could to tidy up the house for the expected visit. there had beenrough-stoning done in the middle of the floor, while the flags under thechairs and table and round the walls retained their dark unwashedappearance. although the day was hot, there burnt a large fire in thegrate, making the whole place feel like an oven. margaret did notunderstand that the lavishness of coals was a sign of hospitablewelcome to her on mary\"s part, and thought that perhaps the oppressiveheat was necessary for bessy. bessy herself lay on a squab, or shortsofa, placed under the window. she was very much more feeble than onthe previous day, and tired with raising herself at every step to look outand see if it was margaret coming. and now that margaret was there,and had taken a chair by her, bessy lay back silent, and content to lookat margaret\"s face, and touch her articles of dress, with a childishadmiration of their fineness of texture.
　　\"i never knew why folk in the bible cared for soft raiment afore. but itmust be nice to go dressed as yo\" do. it\"s different fro\" common. mostfine folk tire my eyes out wi\" their colours; but some how yours rest me.
　　where did ye get this frock?\"
　　\"in london,\" said margaret, much amused.
　　\"london! have yo\" been in london?\"
　　\"yes! i lived there for some years. but my home was in a forest; in thecountry.
　　\"tell me about it,\" said bessy. \"i like to hear speak of the country andtrees, and such like things.\" she leant back, and shut her eye and crossedher hands over her breast, lying at perfect rest, as if t receive all theideas margaret could suggest.
　　margaret had never spoken of helstone since she left it, except justnaming the place incidentally. she saw it in dreams more vivid thanlife, and as she fell away to slumber at nights her memory wandered inall its pleasant places. but her heart was opened to this girl; \"oh, bessy,i loved the home we have left so dearly! i wish you could see it. icannot tell you half its beauty. there are great trees standing all aboutit, with their branches stretching long andlevel, and making a deepshade of rest even at noonday. and yet, though every leaf may seemstill, there is a continual rushing sound of movement all around--not
　　close at hand. then sometimes the turf is as soft and fine as velvet; andsometimes quite lush with the perpetual moisture of a little, hidden,tinkling brook near at hand. and then in other parts there are billowyferns--whole stretches of fern; some in the green shadow; some withlong streaks of golden sunlight lying on them--just like the sea.\"
　　\"i have never seen the sea,\" murmured bessy. \"but go on.\"
　　\"then, here and there, there are wide commons, high up as if above thevery tops of the trees--\"
　　\"i\"m glad of that. i felt smothered like down below. when i have gonefor an out, i\"ve always wanted to get high up and see far away, and takea deep breath o\" fulness in that air. i get smothered enough in milton,and i think the sound yo\" speak of among the trees, going on for everand ever, would send me dazed; it\"s that made my head ache so in themill. now on these commons i reckon there is but little noise?\"
　　\"no,\" said margaret; \"nothing but here and there a lark high in the air.
　　sometimes i used to hear a farmer speaking sharp and loud to hisservants; but it was so far away that it only reminded me pleasantly thatother people were hard at work in some distant place, while i just sat onthe heather and did nothing.\"
　　\"i used to think once that if i could have a day of doing nothing, to restme--a day in some quiet place like that yo\" speak on--it would maybeset me up. but now i\"ve had many days o\" idleness, and i\"m just asweary o\" them as i was o\" my work. sometimes i\"m so tired out i think icannot enjoy heaven without a piece of rest first. i\"m rather afeard o\"
　　going straight there without getting a good sleep in the grave to set meup.\"
　　\"don\"t be afraid, bessy,\" said margaret, laying her hand on the girl\"s;\"god can give you more perfect rest than even idleness on earth, or thedead sleep of the grave can do.\"
　　bessy moved uneasily; then she said:
　　\"i wish father would not speak as he does. he means well, as i telled yo\"
　　yesterday, and tell yo\" again and again. but yo\" see, though i don\"tbelieve him a bit by day, yet by night--when i\"m in a fever, half-asleepand half-awake--it comes back upon me--oh! so bad! and i think, if thisshould be th\" end of all, and if all i\"ve been born for is just to work myheart and my life away, and to sicken i\" this dree place, wi\" them mill-noises in my ears for ever, until i could scream out for them to stop, andlet me have a little piece o\" quiet--and wi\" the fluff filling my lungs, untili thirst to death for one long deep breath o\" the clear air yo\" speak on-andmy mother gone, and i never able to tell her again how i loved her,and o\" all my troubles--i think if this life is th\" end, and that there\"s nogod to wipe away all tears from all eyes--yo\" wench, yo\"!\" said she,sitting up, and clutching violently, almost fiercely, at margaret\"s hand, \"i
　　could go mad, and kill yo\", i could.\" she fell back completely worn outwith her passion. margaret knelt down by her.
　　\"bessy--we have a father in heaven.\"
　　\"i know it! i know it,\" moaned she, turning her head uneasily from sideto side. \"i\"m very wicked. i\"ve spoken very wickedly. oh! don\"t befrightened by me and never come again. i would not harm a hair of yourhead. and,\" opening her eyes, and looking earnestly at margaret, \"ibelieve, perhaps, more than yo\" do o\" what\"s to come. i read the book o\"
www.xiabook.com  www.7wenxue.com



第42章 CHAPTER XIII A SOFT BREEZE IN A SULTRY PLACE (2)


　　revelations until i know it off by heart, and i never doubt when i\"mwaking, and in my senses, of all the glory i\"m to come to.\"
　　\"don\"t let us talk of what fancies come into your head when you arefeverish. i would rather hear something about what you used to dowhen you were well.\"
　　\"i think i was well when mother died, but i have never been rightlystrong sin\" somewhere about that time. i began to work in a carding-room soon after, and the fluff got into my lungs and poisoned me.\"
　　\"fluff?\" said margaret, inquiringly.
　　\"fluff,\" repeated bessy. \"little bits, as fly off fro\" the cotton, when they\"recarding it, and fill the air till it looks all fine white dust. they say itwinds round the lungs, and tightens them up. anyhow, there\"s many aone as works in a carding-room, that falls into a waste, coughing andspitting blood, because they\"re just poisoned by the fluff.\"
　　\"but can\"t it be helped?\" asked margaret.
　　\"i dunno. some folk have a great wheel at one end o\" their carding-rooms to make a draught, and carry off th\" dust; but that wheel costs adeal o\" money--five or six hundred pound, maybe, and brings in noprofit; so it\"s but a few of th\" masters as will put \"em up; and i\"ve heardtell o\" men who didn\"t like working places where there was a wheel,because they said as how it mad \"em hungry, at after they\"d been longused to swallowing fluff, tone go without it, and that their wage oughtto be raised if they were to work in such places. so between mastersand men th\" wheels fall through. i know i wish there\"d been a wheel inour place, though.\"
　　\"did not your father know about it?\" asked margaret.
　　\"yes! and he were sorry. but our factory were a good one on the whole;and a steady likely set o\" people; and father was afeard of letting me goto a strange place, for though yo\" would na think it now, many a onethen used to call me a gradely lass enough. and i did na like to bereckoned nesh and soft, and mary\"s schooling were to be kept up,mother said, and father he were always liking to buy books, and go tolectures o\" one kind or another--all which took money--so i just workedon till i shall ne\"er get the whirr out o\" my ears, or the fluff out o\" mythroat i\" this world. that\"s all.\"
　　\"how old are you?\" asked margaret.
　　\"nineteen, come july.\"
　　\"and i too am nineteen.\" she thought, more sorrowfully than bessy did,of the contrast between them. she could not speak for a moment or twofor the emotion she was trying to keep down.
　　\"about mary,\" said bessy. \"i wanted to ask yo\" to be a friend to her. she\"sseventeen, but she\"s th\" last on us. and i don\"t want her to go to th\" mill,and yet i dunno what she\"s fit for.\"
　　\"she could not do\"--margaret glanced unconsciously at the uncleanedcorners of the room--\"she could hardly undertake a servant\"s place,could she? we have an old faithful servant, almost a friend, who wantshelp, but who is very particular; and it would not be right to plague herwith giving her any assistance that would really be an annoyance and anirritation.\"
　　\"no, i see. i reckon yo\"re right. our mary\"s a good wench; but who hasshe had to teach her what to do about a house? no mother, and me atthe mill till i were good for nothing but scolding her for doing badlywhat i didn\"t know how to do a bit. but i wish she could ha\" lived wi\"
　　yo\", for all that.\"
www.xiabook.com



第43章 CHAPTER XIII A SOFT BREEZE IN A SULTRY PLACE (3)


　　\"but even though she may not be exactly fitted to come and live with usas a servant--and i don\"t know about that--i will always try and be afriend to her for your sake, bessy. and now i must go. i will comeagain as soon as i can; but if it should not be to-morrow, or the nextday, or even a week or a fortnight hence, don\"t think i\"ve forgotten you.
　　i may be busy.\"
　　\"i\"ll know yo\" won\"t forget me again. i\"ll not mistrust yo\" no more. butremember, in a week or a fortnight i may be dead and buried!\"
　　\"i\"ll come as soon as i can, bessy,\" said margaret, squeezing her handtight. \"but you\"ll let me know if you are worse.
　　\"ay, that will i,\" said bessy, returning the pressure.
　　from that day forwards mrs. hale became more and more of a sufferinginvalid. it was now drawing near to the anniversary of edith\"s marriage,and looking back upon the year\"s accumulated heap of troubles,margaret wondered how they had been borne. if she could haveanticipated them, how she would have shrunk away and hid herselffrom the coming time! and yet day by day had, of itself, and by itself,been very endurable--small, keen, bright little spots of positiveenjoyment having come sparkling into the very middle of sorrows. ayear ago, or when she first went to helstone, and first became silentlyconscious of the querulousness in her mother\"s temper, she would havegroaned bitterly over the idea of a long illness to be borne in a strange,desolate, noisy, busy place, with diminished comforts on every side ofthe home life. but with the increase of serious and just ground of
　　complaint, a new kind of patience had sprung up in her mother\"s mind.
　　she was gentle and quiet in intense bodily suffering, almost inproportion as she had been restless and depressed when there had beenno real cause for grief. mr. hale was in exactly that stage ofapprehension which, in men of his stamp, takes the shape of wilfulblindness. he was more irritated than margaret had ever known him athis daughter\"s expressed anxiety.
　　\"indeed, margaret, you are growing fanciful! god knows i should be thefirst to take the alarm if your mother were really ill; we always sawwhen she had her headaches at helstone, even without her telling us.
　　she looks quite pale and white when she is ill; and now she has a brighthealthy colour in her cheeks, just as she used to have when i first knewher.\"
　　\"but, papa,\" said margaret, with hesitation, \"do you know, i think that isthe flush of pain.\"
　　\"nonsense, margaret. i tell you, you are too fanciful. you are the personnot well, i think. send for the doctor to-morrow for yourself; and then,if it will make your mind easier, he can see your mother.\"
　　\"thank you, dear papa. it will make me happier, indeed.\" and she wentup to him to kiss him. but he pushed her away--gently enough, but stillas if she had suggested unpleasant ideas, which he should be glad to getrid of as readily as he could of her presence. he walked uneasily up anddown the room.
　　\"poor maria!\" said he, half soliloquising, \"i wish one could do rightwithout sacrificing others. i shall hate this town, and myself too, if she---pray, margaret, does your mother often talk to you of the old places ofhelstone, i mean?\"
　　\"no, papa,\" said margaret, sadly.
　　\"then, you see, she can\"t be fretting after them, eh? it has always been acomfort to me to think that your mother was so simple and open that iknew every little grievance she had. she never would conceal anythingseriously affecting her health from me: would she, eh, margaret? i amquite sure she would not. so don\"t let me hear of these foolish morbidideas. come, give me a kiss, and run off to bed.\"
　　but she heard him pacing about (racooning, as she and edith used tocall it) long after her slow and languid undressing was finished--longafter she began to listen as she lay in bed.
t



第44章 CHAPTER XIV THE MUTINY (1)


　　\"i was usedto sleep at nights as sweetly as a child,-now if the wind blew rough, it made me start,and think of my poor boy tossing aboutupon the roaring seas. and then i seemedto feel that it was hard to take him from mefor such a little fault.\"
　　southey.
　　it was a comfort to margaret about this time, to find that her motherdrew more tenderly and intimately towards her than she had ever donesince the days of her childhood. she took her to her heart as aconfidential friend--the post margaret had always longed to fill, and hadenvied dixon for being preferred to. margaret took pains to respond toevery call made upon her for sympathy--and they were many--evenwhen they bore relation to trifles, which she would no more havenoticed or regarded herself than the elephant would perceive the littlepin at his feet, which yet he lifts carefully up at the bidding of hiskeeper. all unconsciously margaret drew near to a reward.
　　one evening, mr. hale being absent, her mother began to talk to herabout her brother frederick, the very subject on which margaret hadlonged to ask questions, and almost the only one on which her timidityovercame her natural openness. the more she wanted to hear about him,the less likely she was to speak.
　　\"oh, margaret, it was so windy last night! it came howling down thechimney in our room! i could not sleep. i never can when there is such aterrible wind. i got into a wakeful habit when poor frederick was at sea;and now, even if i don\"t waken all at once, i dream of him in somestormy sea, with great, clear, glass-green walls of waves on either sidehis ship, but far higher than her very masts, curling over her with thatcruel, terrible white foam, like some gigantic crested serpent. it is anold dream, but it always comes back on windy nights, till i am thankfulto waken, sitting straight and stiff up in bed with my terror. poorfrederick! he is on land now, so wind can do him no harm. though idid think it might shake down some of those tall chimneys.\"
　　\"where is frederick now, mamma? our letters are directed to the care ofmessrs. barbour, at cadiz, i know; but where is he himself?\"
　　\"i can\"t remember the name of the place, but he is not called hale; you
　　must remember that, margaret. notice the f. d. in every corner of theletters. he has taken the name of dickenson. i wanted him to have beencalled beresford, to which he had a kind of right, but your fatherthought he had better not. he might be recognised, you know, if hewere called by my name.\"
　　\"mamma,\" said margaret, \"i was at aunt shaw\"s when it all happened;and i suppose i was not old enough to be told plainly about it. but ishould like to know now, if i may--if it does not give you too much painto speak about it.\"
　　\"pain! no,\" replied mrs. hale, her cheek flushing. \"yet it is pain to thinkthat perhaps i may never see my darling boy again. or else he did right,margaret. they may say what they like, but i have his own letters toshow, and i\"ll believe him, though he is my son, sooner than any court-martial on earth. go to my little japan cabinet, dear, and in the secondleft-hand drawer you will find a packet of letters.\"
　　margaret went. there were the yellow, sea-stained letters, with thepeculiar fragrance which ocean letters have: margaret carried them backto her mother, who untied the silken string with trembling fingers, and,examining their dates, she gave them to margaret to read, making herhurried, anxious remarks on their contents, almost before her daughtercould have understood what they were.
　　\"you see, margaret, how from the very first he disliked captain reid.
　　he was second lieutenant in the ship--the orion--in which fredericksailed the very first time. poor little fellow, how well he looked in hismidshipman\"s dress, with his dirk in his hand, cutting open all thenewspapers with it as if it were a paper-knife! but this mr. reid, as hewas then, seemed to take a dislike to frederick from the very beginning.
　　and then--stay! these are the letters he wrote on board the russell.
　　when he was appointed to her, and found his old enemy captain reidin command, he did mean to bear all his tyranny patiently. look! this isthe letter. just read it, margaret. where is it he says--stop--\"my fathermay rely upon me, that i will bear with all proper patience everythingthat one officer and gentleman can take from another. but from myformer knowledge of my present captain, i confess i look forward withapprehension to a long course of tyranny on board the russell.\" you see,he promises to bear patiently, and i am sure he did, for he was thesweetest-tempered boy, when he was not vexed, that could possibly be.
　　is that the letter in which he speaks of captain reid\"s impatience withthe men, for not going through the ship\"s manoeuvres as quickly as theavenger? you see, he says that they had many new hands on board therussell, while the avenger had been nearly three years on the station,with nothing to do but to keep slavers off, and work her men, till theyran up and down the rigging like rats or monkeys.\"
　　margaret slowly read the letter, half illegible through the fading of theink. it might be--it probably was--a statement of captain reid\"simperiousness in trifles, very much exaggerated by the narrator, whohad written it while fresh and warm from the scene of altercation. somesailors being aloft in the main-topsail rigging, the captain had orderedthem to race down, threatening the hindmost with the cat-of-nine-tails.
wＷw。xiabｏok.com



第45章 CHAPTER XIV THE MUTINY (2)


　　he who was the farthest on the spar, feeling the impossibility of passinghis companions, and yet passionately dreading the disgrace of theflogging, threw himself desperately down to catch a rope considerablylower, failed, and fell senseless on deck. he only survived for a fewhours afterwards, and the indignation of the ship\"s crew was at boilingpoint when young hale wrote.
　　\"but we did not receive this letter till long, long after we heard of themutiny. poor fred! i dare say it was a comfort to him to write it eventhough he could not have known how to send it, poor fellow! and thenwe saw a report in the papers--that\"s to say, long before fred\"s letterreached us--of an atrocious mutiny having broken out on board therussell, and that the mutineers had remained in possession of the ship,which had gone off, it was supposed, to be a pirate; and that captainreid was sent adrift in a boat with some men--officers or something-whosenames were all given, for they were picked up by a west-indiansteamer. oh, margaret! how your father and i turned sick over that list,when there was no name of frederick hale. we thought it must be somemistake; for poor fred was such a fine fellow, only perhaps rather toopassionate; and we hoped that the name of carr, which was in the list,was a misprint for that of hale--newspapers are so careless. andtowards post-time the next day, papa set off to walk to southampton toget the papers; and i could not stop at home, so i went to meet him. hewas very late--much later than i thought he would have been; and i satdown under the hedge to wait for him. he came at last, his armshanging loose down, his head sunk, and walking heavily along, as ifevery step was a labour and a trouble. margaret, i see him now.\"
　　\"don\"t go on, mamma. i can understand it all,\" said margaret, leaning upcaressingly against her mother\"s side, and kissing her hand.
　　\"no, you can\"t, margaret. no one can who did not see him then. i couldhardly lift myself up to go and meet him--everything seemed so to reelaround me all at once. and when i got to him, he did not speak, or seemsurprised to see me there, more than three miles from home, beside theoldham beech-tree; but he put my arm in his, and kept stroking myhand, as if he wanted to soothe me to be very quiet under some greatheavy blow; and when i trembled so all over that i could not speak, hetook me in his arms, and stooped down his head on mine, and began toshake and to cry in a strange muffled, groaning voice, till i, for very
　　fright, stood quite still, and only begged him to tell me what he hadheard. and then, with his hand jerking, as if some one else moved itagainst his will, he gave me a wicked newspaper to read, calling ourfrederick a \"traitor of the blackest dye,\" \"a base, ungrateful disgrace tohis profession.\" oh! i cannot tell what bad words they did not use. itook the paper in my hands as soon as i had read it--i tore it up to littlebits--i tore it--oh! i believe margaret, i tore it with my teeth. i did notcry. i could not. my cheeks were as hot as fire, and my very eyes burntin my head. i saw your father looking grave at me. i said it was a lie,and so it was. months after, this letter came, and you see whatprovocation frederick had. it was not for himself, or his own injuries,he rebelled; but he would speak his mind to captain reid, and so itwent on from bad to worse; and you see, most of the sailors stuck byfrederick.
　　\"i think, margaret,\" she continued, after a pause, in a weak, trembling,exhausted voice, \"i am glad of it--i am prouder of frederick standing upagainst injustice, than if he had been simply a good officer.\"
　　\"i am sure i am,\" said margaret, in a firm, decided tone. \"loyalty andobedience to wisdom and justice are fine; but it is still finer to defyarbitrary power, unjustly and cruelly used-not on behalf of ourselves,but on behalf of others more helpless.\"
　　\"for all that, i wish i could see frederick once more--just once. he wasmy first baby, margaret.\" mrs. hale spoke wistfully, and almost as ifapologising for the yearning, craving wish, as though it were adepreciation of her remaining child. but such an idea never crossedmargaret\"s mind. she was thinking how her mother\"s desire could befulfilled.
　　\"it is six or seven years ago--would they still prosecute him, mother? ifhe came and stood his trial, what would be the punishment? surely, hemight bring evidence of his great provocation.\"
　　\"it would do no good,\" replied mrs. hale. \"some of the sailors whoaccompanied frederick were taken, and there was a court-martial heldon them on board the amicia; i believed all they said in their defence,poor fellows, because it just agreed with frederick\"s story--but it was ofno use,--\" and for the first time during the conversation mrs. hale beganto cry; yet something possessed margaret to force the information sheforesaw, yet dreaded, from her mother.
　　\"what happened to them, mamma?\" asked she.
　　\"they were hung at the yard-arm,\" said mrs. hale, solemnly. \"and theworst was that the court, in condemning them to death, said they hadsuffered themselves to be led astray from their duty by their superiorofficers.\"
　　they were silent for a long time.
　　\"and frederick was in south america for several years, was he not?\"
　　\"yes. and now he is in spain. at cadiz, or somewhere near it. if hecomes to england he will be hung. i shall never see his face again--forif he comes to england he will be hung.\"
　　there was no comfort to be given. mrs. hale turned her face to the wall,and lay perfectly still in her mother\"s despair. nothing could be said toconsole her. she took her hand out of margaret\"s with a little impatientmovement, as if she would fain be left alone with the recollection of herson. when mr. hale came in, margaret went out, oppressed withgloom, and seeing no promise of brightness on any side of the horizon.
www.xiabook.com



第46章 CHAPTER XV MASTERS AND MEN (1)


　　\"thought fights with thought; out springs a spark oftruthfrom the collision of the sword and shield.\"
　　w. s. landor.
　　\"margaret,\" said her father, the next day, \"we must return mrs. thornton\"scall. your mother is not very well, and thinks she cannot walk so far;but you and i will go this afternoon.\"
　　as they went, mr. hale began about his wife\"s health, with a kind ofveiled anxiety, which margaret was glad to see awakened at last.
　　\"did you consult the doctor, margaret? did you send for him?\"
　　\"no, papa, you spoke of his corning to see me. now i was well. but if ionly knew of some good doctor, i would go this afternoon, and ask himto come, for i am sure mamma is seriously indisposed.\"
　　she put the truth thus plainly and strongly because her father had socompletely shut his mind against the idea, when she had last named herfears. but now the case was changed. he answered in a despondenttone:
　　\"do you think she has any hidden complaint? do you think she is reallyvery ill? has dixon said anything? oh, margaret! i am haunted by thefear that our coming to milton has killed her. my poor maria!\"
　　\"oh, papa! don\"t imagine such things,\" said margaret, shocked. \"she isnot well, that is all. many a one is not well for a time; and with goodadvice gets better and stronger than ever.\"
　　\"but has dixon said anything about her?\"
　　\"no! you know dixon enjoys making a mystery out of trifles; and she
　　has been a little mysterious about mamma\"s health, which has alarmedme rather, that is all. without any reason, i dare say. you know, papa,you said the other day i was getting fanciful.\"
　　\"i hope and trust you are. but don\"t think of what i said then. i like youto be fanciful about your mother\"s health. don\"t be afraid of telling meyour fancies. i like to hear them, though, i dare say, i spoke as if i wasannoyed. but we will ask mrs. thornton if she can tell us of a gooddoctor. we won\"t throw away our money on any but some one first-rate.
　　stay, we turn up this street.\"
　　the street did not look as if it could contain any house large enough formrs. thornton\"s habitation. her son\"s presence never gave anyimpression as to the kind of house he lived in; but, unconsciously,margaret had imagined that tall, massive, handsomely dressed mrs.
　　thornton must live in a house of the same character as herself. nowmarlborough street consisted of long rows of small houses, with ablank wall here and there; at least that was all they could see from thepoint at which they entered it.
　　\"he told me he lived in marlborough street, i\"m sure,\" said mr. hale,with a much perplexed air.
　　\"perhaps it is one of the economies he still practises, to live in a verysmall house. but here are plenty of people about; let me ask.\"
　　she accordingly inquired of a passer-by, and was informed that mr.
　　thornton lived close to the mill, and had the factory lodge-door pointedout to her, at the end of the long dead wall they had noticed.
　　the lodge-door was like a common garden-door; on one side of it weregreat closed gates for the ingress and egress of lurries and wagons. thelodge-keeper admitted them into a great oblong yard, on one side ofwhich were offices for the transaction of business; on the opposite, animmense many-windowed mill, whence proceeded the continual clankof machinery and the long groaning roar of the steam-engine, enough todeafen those who lived within the enclosure. opposite to the wall, alongwhich the street ran, on one of the narrow sides of the oblong, was ahandsome stone-coped house,--blackened, to be sure, by the smoke, butwith paint, windows, and steps kept scrupulously clean. it was evidentlya house which had been built some fifty or sixty years. the stonefacings--the long, narrow windows, and the number of them--the flightsof steps up to the front door, ascending from either side, and guarded byrailing--all witnessed to its age. margaret only wondered why peoplewho could afford to live in so good a house, and keep it in such perfectorder, did not prefer a much smaller dwelling in the country, or evensome suburb; not in the continual whirl and din of the factory. herunaccustomed ears could hardly catch her father\"s voice, as they stoodon the steps awaiting the opening of the door. the yard, too, with the
　　great doors in the dead wall as a boundary, was but a dismal look-outfor the sitting-rooms of the house--as margaret found when they hadmounted the old-fashioned stairs, and been ushered into the drawing-room, the three windows of which went over the front door and theroom on the right-hand side of the entrance. there was no one in thedrawing-room. it seemed as though no one had been in it since the daywhen the furniture was bagged up with as much care as if the house wasto be overwhelmed with lava, and discovered a thousand years hence.
　　the walls were pink and gold; the pattern on the carpet representedbunches of flowers on a light ground, but it was carefully covered up inthe centre by a linen drugget, glazed and colourless. the window-curtains were lace; each chair and sofa had its own particular veil ofnetting, or knitting. great alabaster groups occupied every flat surface,safe from dust under their glass shades. in the middle of the room, rightunder the bagged-up chandelier, was a large circular table, with smartly-bound books arranged at regular intervals round the circumference of itspolished surface, like gaily-coloured spokes of a wheel. everythingreflected light, nothing absorbed it. the whole room had a painfullyspotted, spangled, speckled look about it, which impressed margaret sounpleasantly that she was hardly conscious of the peculiar cleanlinessrequired to keep everything so white and pure in such an atmosphere, orof the trouble that must be willingly expended to secure that effect oficy, snowy discomfort. wherever she looked there was evidence of careand labour, but not care and labour to procure ease, to help on habits oftranquil home employment; solely to ornament, and then to preserveornament from dirt or destruction.
　　they had leisure to observe, and to speak to each other in low voices,before mrs. thornton appeared. they were talking of what all the worldmight hear; but it is a common effect of such a room as this to makepeople speak low, as if unwilling to awaken the unused echoes.
www.xiabook.com下 //书 //网



第47章 CHAPTER XV MASTERS AND MEN (2)


　　at last mrs. thornton came in, rustling in handsome black silk, as washer wont; her muslins and laces rivalling, not excelling, the purewhiteness of the muslins and netting of the room. margaret explainedhow it was that her mother could not accompany them to return mrs.
　　thornton\"s call; but in her anxiety not to bring back her father\"s fearstoo vividly, she gave but a bungling account, and left the impression onmrs. thornton\"s mind that mrs. hale\"s was some temporary or fancifulfine-ladyish indisposition, which might have been put aside had therebeen a strong enough motive; or that if it was too severe to allow her tocome out that day, the call might have been deferred. remembering,too, the horses to her carriage, hired for her own visit to the hales, andhow fanny had been ordered to go by mr. thornton, in order to payevery respect to them, mrs. thornton drew up slightly offended, and
　　gave margaret no sympathy--indeed, hardly any credit for the statementof her mother\"s indisposition.
　　\"how is mr. thornton?\" asked mr. hale. \"i was afraid he was not well,from his hurried note yesterday.\"
　　\"my son is rarely ill; and when he is, he never speaks about it, or makesit an excuse for not doing anything. he told me he could not get leisureto read with you last night, sir. he regretted it, i am sure; he values thehours spent with you.\"
　　\"i am sure they are equally agreeable to me,\" said mr. hale. \"it makes mefeel young again to see his enjoyment and appreciation of all that is finein classical literature.\"
　　\"i have no doubt the classics are very desirable for people who haveleisure. but, i confess, it was against my judgment that my son renewedhis study of them. the time and place in which he lives, seem to me torequire all his energy and attention. classics may do very well for menwho loiter away their lives in the country or in colleges; but milton menought to have their thoughts and powers absorbed in the work of to-day.
　　at least, that is my opinion.\" this last clause she gave out with \"the pridethat apes humility.\"
　　\"but, surely, if the mind is too long directed to one object only, it willget stiff and rigid, and unable to take in many interests,\" said margaret.
　　\"i do not quite understand what you mean by a mind getting stiff andrigid. nor do i admire those whirligig characters that are full of thisthing to-day, to be utterly forgetful of it in their new interest to-morrow.
　　having many interests does not suit the life of a milton manufacturer. itis, or ought to be, enough for him to have one great desire, and to bringall the purposes of his life to bear on the fulfilment of that.\"
　　\"and that is--?\" asked mr. hale.
　　her sallow cheek flushed, and her eye lightened, as she answered:
　　\"to hold and maintain a high, honourable place among the merchants ofhis country--the men of his town. such a place my son has earned forhimself. go where you will--i don\"t say in england only, but in europe-thename of john thornton of milton is known and respected amongstall men of business. of course, it is unknown in the fashionable circles,\"
　　she continued, scornfully. \"idle gentlemen and ladies are not likely toknow much of a milton manufacturer, unless he gets into parliament, ormarries a lord\"s daughter.\"
　　both mr. hale and margaret had an uneasy, ludicrous consciousnessthat they had never heard of this great name, until mr. bell had writtenthem word that mr. thornton would be a good friend to have in milton.
　　the proud mother\"s world was not their world of harley streetgentilities on the one hand, or country clergymen and hampshiresquires on the other. margaret\"s face, in spite of all her endeavours to
　　keep it simply listening in its expression told the sensitive mrs.
　　thornton this feeling of hers.
　　\"you think you never heard of this wonderful son of mine, miss hale.
　　you think i\"m an old woman whose ideas are bounded by milton, andwhose own crow is the whitest ever seen.\"
　　\"no,\" said margaret, with some spirit. \"it may be true, that i was thinkingi had hardly heard mr. thornton\"s name before i came to milton. butsince i have come here, i have heard enough to make me respect andadmire him, and to feel how much justice and truth there is in what youhave said of him.\"
　　\"who spoke to you of him?\" asked mrs. thornton, a little mollified, yetjealous lest any one else\"s words should not have done him full justice.
　　margaret hesitated before she replied. she did not like this authoritativequestioning. mr. hale came in, as he thought, to the rescue.
　　\"it was what mr. thornton said himself, that made us know the kind ofman he was. was it not, margaret?\"
　　mrs. thornton drew herself up, and said-\"
　　my son is not the one to tell of his own doings. may i again ask you,miss hale, from whose account you formed your favourable opinion ofhim? a mother is curious and greedy of commendation of her children,you know.\"
　　margaret replied, \"it was as much from what mr. thornton withheld ofthat which we had been told of his previous life by mr. bell,--it wasmore that than what he said, that made us all feel what reason you haveto be proud of him.\"
　　\"mr. bell! what can he know of john? he, living a lazy life in a drowsycollege. but i\"m obliged to you, miss hale. many a missy young ladywould have shrunk from giving an old woman the pleasure of hearingthat her son was well spoken of.\"
　　\"why?\" asked margaret, looking straight at mrs. thornton, inbewilderment.
　　\"why! because i suppose they might have consciences that told themhow surely they were making the old mother into an advocate for them,in case they had any plans on the son\"s heart.\"
　　she smiled a grim smile, for she had been pleased by margaret\"sfrankness; and perhaps she felt that she had been asking questions toomuch as if she had a right to catechise. margaret laughed outright at thenotion presented to her; laughed so merrily that it grated on mrs.
　　thornton\"s ear, as if the words that called forth that laugh, must havebeen utterly and entirely ludicrous.
　　margaret stopped her merriment as soon as she saw mrs. thornton\"sannoyed look.
　　\"i beg your pardon, madam. but i really am very much obliged to you
　　for exonerating me from making any plans on mr. thornton\"s heart.\"
　　\"young ladies have, before now,\" said mrs. thornton, stiffly.
　　\"i hope miss thornton is well,\" put in mr. hale, desirous of changing thecurrent of the conversation.
www.56ｗen．ＣＯＭ。下 书网



第48章 CHAPTER XV MASTERS AND MEN (3)


　　\"she is as well as she ever is. she is not strong,\" replied mrs. thornton,shortly.
　　\"and mr. thornton? i suppose i may hope to see him on thursday?\"
　　\"i cannot answer for my son\"s engagements. there is someuncomfortable work going on in the town; a threatening of a strike. ifso, his experience and judgment will make him much consulted by hisfriends. but i should think he could come on thursday. at any rate, iam sure he will let you know if he cannot.\"
　　\"a strike!\" asked margaret. \"what for? what are they going to strike for?\"
　　\"for the mastership and ownership of other people\"s property,\" said mrs.
　　thornton, with a fierce snort. \"that is what they always strike for. if myson\"s work-people strike, i will only say they are a pack of ungratefulhounds. but i have no doubt they will.\"
　　\"they are wanting higher wages, i suppose?\" asked mr. hale.
　　\"that is the face of the thing. but the truth is, they want to be masters,and make the masters into slaves on their own ground. they are alwaystrying at it; they always have it in their minds and every five or sixyears, there comes a struggle between masters and men. they\"ll findthemselves mistaken this time, i fancy,--a little out of their reckoning. ifthey turn out, they mayn\"t find it so easy to go in again. i believe, themasters have a thing or two in their heads which will teach the men notto strike again in a hurry, if they try it this time.\"
　　\"does it not make the town very rough?\" asked margaret.
　　\"of course it does. but surely you are not a coward, are you? milton isnot the place for cowards. i have known the time when i have had tothread my way through a crowd of white, angry men, all swearing theywould have makinson\"s blood as soon as he ventured to show his noseout of his factory; and he, knowing nothing of it, some one had to goand tell him, or he was a dead man, and it needed to be a woman,--so iwent. and when i had got in, i could not get out. it was as much as mylife was worth. so i went up to the roof, where there were stones piledready to drop on the heads of the crowd, if they tried to force the factorydoors. and i would have lifted those heavy stones, and dropped themwith as good an aim as the best man there, but that i fainted with theheat i had gone through. if you live in milton, you must learn to have abrave heart, miss hale.\"
　　\"i would do my best,\" said margaret rather pale. \"i do not know whether iam brave or not till i am tried; but i am afraid i should be a coward.\"
　　\"south country people are often frightened by what our darkshire men
　　and women only call living and struggling. but when you\"ve been tenyears among a people who are always owing their betters a grudge, andonly waiting for an opportunity to pay it off, you\"ll know whether youare a coward or not, take my word for it.\"
　　mr. thornton came that evening to mr. hale\"s. he was shown up intothe drawing-room, where mr. hale was reading aloud to his wife anddaughter.
　　\"i am come partly to bring you a note from my mother, and partly toapologise for not keeping to my time yesterday. the note contains theaddress you asked for; dr. donaldson.\"
　　\"thank you!\" said margaret, hastily, holding out her hand to take thenote, for she did not wish her mother to hear that they had been makingany inquiry about a doctor. she was pleased that mr. thornton seemedimmediately to understand her feeling; he gave her the note withoutanother word of explanation.
　　mr. hale began to talk about the strike. mr. thornton\"s face assumed alikeness to his mother\"s worst expression, which immediately repelledthe watching margaret.
　　\"yes; the fools will have a strike. let them. it suits us well enough. butwe gave them a chance. they think trade is flourishing as it was lastyear. we see the storm on the horizon and draw in our sails. butbecause we don\"t explain our reasons, they won\"t believe we\"re actingreasonably. we must give them line and letter for the way we choose tospend or save our money. henderson tried a dodge with his men, out atashley, and failed. he rather wanted a strike; it would have suited hisbook well enough. so when the men came to ask for the five per cent.
　　they are claiming, he told \"em he\"d think about it, and give them hisanswer on the pay day; knowing all the while what his answer wouldbe, of course, but thinking he\"d strengthen their conceit of their ownway. however, they were too deep for him, and heard something aboutthe bad prospects of trade. so in they came on the friday, and drewback their claim, and now he\"s obliged to go on working. but we miltonmasters have to-day sent in our decision. we won\"t advance a penny.
　　we tell them we may have to lower wages; but can\"t afford to raise. sohere we stand, waiting for their next attack.\"
　　\"and what will that be?\" asked mr. hale.
　　\"i conjecture, a simultaneous strike. you will see milton without smokein a few days, i imagine, miss hale.\"
　　\"but why,\" asked she, \"could you not explain what good reason you havefor expecting a bad trade? i don\"t know whether i use the right words,but you will understand what i mean.\"
　　\"do you give your servants reasons for your expenditure, or youreconomy in the use of your own money? we, the owners of capital,
　　have a right to choose what we will do with it.\"
　　\"a human right,\" said margaret, very low.
　　\"i beg your pardon, i did not hear what you said.\"
　　\"i would rather not repeat it,\" said she; \"it related to a feeling which i donot think you would share.\"
　　\"won\"t you try me?\" pleaded he; his thoughts suddenly bent uponlearning what she had said. she was displeased with his pertinacity, butdid not choose to affix too much importance to her words.
　　\"i said you had a human right. i meant that there seemed no reason butreligious ones, why you should not do what you like with your own.
　　\"i know we differ in our religious opinions; but don\"t you give me creditfor having some, though not the same as yours?\"
　　he was speaking in a subdued voice, as if to her alone. she did not wishto be so exclusively addressed. she replied out in her usual tone:
wwＷ、xiabook.com  www.7wenxue.com



第49章 CHAPTER XV MASTERS AND MEN (4)


　　\"i do not think that i have any occasion to consider your specialreligious opinions in the affair. all i meant to say is, that there is nohuman law to prevent the employers from utterly wasting or throwingaway all their money, if they choose; but that there are passages in thebible which would rather imply--to me at least--that they neglectedtheir duty as stewards if they did so. however i know so little aboutstrikes, and rate of wages, and capital, and labour, that i had better nottalk to a political economist like you.\"
　　\"nay, the more reason,\" said he, eagerly. \"i shall only be too glad toexplain to you all that may seem anomalous or mysterious to a stranger;especially at a time like this, when our doings are sure to be canvassedby every scribbler who can hold a pen.\"
　　\"thank you,\" she answered, coldly. \"of course, i shall apply to my fatherin the first instance for any information he can give me, if i get puzzledwith living here amongst this strange society.\"
　　\"you think it strange. why?\"
　　\"i don\"t know--i suppose because, on the very face of it, i see twoclasses dependent on each other in every possible way, yet eachevidently regarding the interests of the other as opposed to their own; inever lived in a place before where there were two sets of peoplealways running each other down.\"
　　\"who have you heard running the masters down? i don\"t ask who youhave heard abusing the men; for i see you persist in misunderstandingwhat i said the other day. but who have you heard abusing the masters?\"
　　margaret reddened; then smiled as she said,\"i am not fond of being catechised. i refuse to answer your question.
　　besides, it has nothing to do with the fact. you must take my word forit, that i have heard some people, or, it may be, only someone of theworkpeople, speak as though it were the interest of the employers to
　　keep them from acquiring money--that it would make them tooindependent if they had a sum in the savings\" bank.\"
　　\"i dare say it was that man higgins who told you all this,\" said mrs hale.
　　mr. thornton did not appear to hear what margaret evidently did notwish him to know. but he caught it, nevertheless.
　　\"i heard, moreover, that it was considered to the advantage of themasters to have ignorant workmen--not hedge-lawyers, as captainlennox used to call those men in his company who questioned andwould know the reason for every order.\"
　　this latter part of her sentence she addressed rather to her father than tomr. thornton. who is captain lennox? asked mr. thornton of himself,with a strange kind of displeasure, that prevented him for the momentfrom replying to her! her father took up the conversation.
　　\"you never were fond of schools, margaret, or you would have seen andknown before this, how much is being done for education in milton.\"
　　\"no!\" said she, with sudden meekness. \"i know i do not care enoughabout schools. but the knowledge and the ignorance of which i wasspeaking, did not relate to reading and writing,--the teaching orinformation one can give to a child. i am sure, that what was meant wasignorance of the wisdom that shall guide men and women. i hardlyknow what that is. but he--that is, my informant--spoke as if themasters would like their hands to be merely tall, large children--livingin the present moment--with a blind unreasoning kind of obedience.\"
　　\"in short, miss hale, it is very evident that your informant found a prettyready listener to all the slander he chose to utter against the masters,\"
　　said mr. thornton, in an offended tone.
　　margaret did not reply. she was displeased at the personal character mr.
　　thornton affixed to what she had said.
　　mr. hale spoke next:
　　\"i must confess that, although i have not become so intimatelyacquainted with any workmen as margaret has, i am very much struckby the antagonism between the employer and the employed, on the verysurface of things. i even gather this impression from what you yourselfhave from time to time said.\"
　　mr. thornton paused awhile before he spoke. margaret had just left theroom, and he was vexed at the state of feeling between himself and her.
　　however, the little annoyance, by making him cooler and morethoughtful, gave a greater dignity to what he said:
　　\"my theory is, that my interests are identical with those of myworkpeople and vice-versa. miss hale, i know, does not like to hearmen called \"hands,\" so i won\"t use that word, though it comes mostreadily to my lips as the technical term, whose origin, whatever it was,dates before my time. on some future day--in some millennium--in
　　utopia, this unity may be brought into practice--just as i can fancy arepublic the most perfect form of government.\"
　　\"we will read plato\"s republic as soon as we have finished homer.\"
　　\"well, in the platonic year, it may fall out that we are all--men women,and children--fit for a republic: but give me a constitutional monarchyin our present state of morals and intelligence. in our infancy we requirea wise despotism to govern us. indeed, long past infancy, children andyoung people are the happiest under the unfailing laws of a discreet,firm authority. i agree with miss hale so far as to consider our peoplein the condition of children, while i deny that we, the masters, haveanything to do with the making or keeping them so. i maintain thatdespotism is the best kind of government for them; so that in the hoursin which i come in contact with them i must necessarily be an autocrat.
　　i will use my best discretion--from no humbug or philanthropic feeling,of which we have had rather too much in the north--to make wise lawsand come to just decisions in the conduct of my business--laws anddecisions which work for my own good in the first instance--for theirsin the second; but i will neither be forced to give my reasons, nor flinchfrom what i have once declared to be my resolution. let them turn out!
　　i shall suffer as well as they: but at the end they will find i have notbated nor altered one jot.\"
　　margaret had re-entered the room and was sitting at her work; but shedid not speak. mr. hale answered-\"
www.56ｗen．ＣＯＭ下+书+网



第50章 CHAPTER XV MASTERS AND MEN (5)


　　i dare say i am talking in great ignorance; but from the little i know, ishould say that the masses were already passing rapidly into thetroublesome stage which intervenes between childhood and manhood,in the life of the multitude as well as that of the individual. now, theerror which many parents commit in the treatment of the individual atthis time is, insisting on the same unreasoning obedience as when all hehad to do in the way of duty was, to obey the simple laws of \"comewhen you\"re called and \"do as you\"re bid!\" but a wise parent humoursthe desire for independent action, so as to become the friend and adviserwhen his absolute rule shall cease. if i get wrong in my reasoning,recollect, it is you who adopted the analogy.\"
　　\"very lately,\" said margaret, \"i heard a story of what happened innuremberg only three or four years ago. a rich man there lived alone inone of the immense mansions which were formerly both dwellings andwarehouses. it was reported that he had a child, but no one knew of itfor certain. for forty years this rumour kept rising and falling--neverutterly dying away. after his death it was found to be true. he had a son-an overgrown man with the unexercised intellect of a child, whom hehad kept up in that strange way, in order to save him from temptationand error. but, of course, when this great old child was turned loose into
　　the world, every bad counsellor had power over him. he did not knowgood from evil. his father had made the blunder of bringing him up inignorance and taking it for innocence; and after fourteen months ofriotous living, the city authorities had to take charge of him, in order tosave him from starvation. he could not even use words effectivelyenough to be a successful beggar.\"
　　\"i used the comparison (suggested by miss hale) of the position of themaster to that of a parent; so i ought not to complain of your turning thesimile into a weapon against me. but, mr. hale, when you were settingup a wise parent as a model for us, you said he humoured his children intheir desire for independent action. now certainly, the time is not comefor the hands to have any independent action during business hours; ihardly know what you would mean by it then. and i say, that themasters would be trenching on the independence of their hands, in away that i, for one, should not feel justified in doing, if we interferedtoo much with the life they lead out of the mills. because they labourten hours a-day for us, i do not see that we have any right to imposeleading-strings upon them for the rest of their time. i value my ownindependence so highly that i can fancy no degradation greater than thatof having another man perpetually directing and advising and lecturingme, or even planning too closely in any way about my actions. hemight be the wisest of men, or the most powerful--i should equallyrebel and resent his interference i imagine this is a stronger feeling inthe north of england that in the south.\"
　　\"i beg your pardon, but is not that because there has been none of theequality of friendship between the adviser and advised classes? becauseevery man has had to stand in an unchristian and isolated position, apartfrom and jealous of his brother-man: constantly afraid of his rightsbeing trenched upon?\"
　　\"i only state the fact. i am sorry to say, i have an appointment at eighto\"clock, and i must just take facts as i find them to-night, without tryingto account for them; which, indeed, would make no difference indetermining how to act as things stand--the facts must be granted.\"
　　\"but,\" said margaret in a low voice, \"it seems to me that it makes all thedifference in the world--.\" her father made a sign to her to be silent, andallow mr. thornton to finish what he had to say. he was alreadystanding up and preparing to go.
　　\"you must grant me this one point. given a strong feeling ofindependence in every darkshire man, have i any right to obtrude myviews, of the manner in which he shall act, upon another (hating it as ishould do most vehemently myself), merely because he has labour tosell and i capital to buy?\"
www、mdwenxue.com  http://www.xiaboＯk.com



第51章 CHAPTER XV MASTERS AND MEN (6)


　　\"not in the least,\" said margaret, determined just to say this one thing;
　　\"not in the least because of your labour and capital positions, whateverthey are, but because you are a man, dealing with a set of men overwhom you have, whether you reject the use of it or not, immensepower, just because your lives and your welfare are so constantly andintimately interwoven. god has made us so that we must be mutuallydependent. we may ignore our own dependence, or refuse toacknowledge that others depend upon us in more respects than thepayment of weekly wages; but the thing must be, nevertheless. neitheryou nor any other master can help yourselves. the most proudlyindependent man depends on those around him for their insensibleinfluence on his character--his life. and the most isolated of all yourdarkshire egos has dependants clinging to him on all sides; he cannotshake them off, any more than the great rock he resembles can shake off-\"
　　\"pray don\"t go into similes, margaret; you have led us off once already,\"
　　said her father, smiling, yet uneasy at the thought that they weredetaining mr. thornton against his will, which was a mistake; for herather liked it, as long as margaret would talk, although what she saidonly irritated him.
　　\"just tell me, miss hale, are you yourself ever influenced--no, that is nota fair way of putting it;--but if you are ever conscious of beinginfluenced by others, and not by circumstances, have those others beenworking directly or indirectly? have they been labouring to exhort, toenjoin, to act rightly for the sake of example, or have they been simple,true men, taking up their duty, and doing it unflinchingly, without athought of how their actions were to make this man industrious, thatman saving? why, if i were a workman, i should be twenty times moreimpressed by the knowledge that my master, was honest, punctual,quick, resolute in all his doings (and hands are keener spies even thanvalets), than by any amount of interference, however kindly meant, withmy ways of going on out of work-hours. i do not choose to think tooclosely on what i am myself; but, i believe, i rely on the straightforwardhonesty of my hands, and the open nature of their opposition, in contradistinctionto the way in which the turnout will be managed in somemills, just because they know i scorn to take a single dishonourableadvantage, or do an underhand thing myself it goes farther than a wholecourse of lectures on \"honesty is the best policy\"--life diluted intowords. no, no! what the master is, that will the men be, without overmuchtaking thought on his part.\"
　　\"that is a great admission,\" said margaret, laughing. \"when i see menviolent and obstinate in pursuit of their rights, i may safely infer that themaster is the same that he is a little ignorant of that spirit whichsuffereth long, and is kind, and seeketh not her own.\"
　　\"you are just like all strangers who don\"t understand the working of oursystem, miss hale,\" said he, hastily. \"you suppose that our men arepuppets of dough, ready to be moulded into any amiable form weplease. you forget we have only to do with them for less than a third oftheir lives; and you seem not to perceive that the duties of amanufacturer are far larger and wider than those merely of an employerof labour: we have a wide commercial character to maintain, whichmakes us into the great pioneers of civilisation.\"
　　\"it strikes me,\" said mr. hale, smiling, \"that you might pioneer a little athome. they are a rough, heathenish set of fellows, these milton men ofyours.\"
　　\"they are that,\" replied mr. thornton. \"rosewater surgery won\"t do forthem. cromwell would have made a capital mill-owner, miss hale. iwish we had him to put down this strike for us.\"
　　\"cromwell is no hero of mine,\" said she, coldly. \"but i am trying toreconcile your admiration of despotism with your respect for othermen\"s independence of character.\"
　　he reddened at her tone. \"i choose to be the unquestioned andirresponsible master of my hands, during the hours that they labour forme. but those hours past, our relation ceases; and then comes in thesame respect for their independence that i myself exact.\"
　　he did not speak again for a minute, he was too much vexed. but heshook it off, and bade mr. and mrs. hale good night. then, drawingnear to margaret, he said in a lower voice-\"
　　i spoke hastily to you once this evening, and i am afraid, rather rudely.
　　but you know i am but an uncouth milton manufacturer; will youforgive me?\"
　　\"certainly,\" said she, smiling up in his face, the expression of which wassomewhat anxious and oppressed, and hardly cleared away as he mether sweet sunny countenance, out of which all the north-wind effect oftheir discussion had entirely vanished. but she did not put out her handto him, and again he felt the omission, and set it down to pride.




第52章 CHAPTER XVI THE SHADOW OF DEATH (1)


　　\"trust in that veiled hand, which leadsnone by the path that he would go;and always be for change prepared,
　　for the world\"s law is ebb and flow.\"
　　from the arabic.
　　the next afternoon dr. donaldson came to pay his first visit to mrs.
　　hale. the mystery that margaret hoped their late habits of intimacy hadbroken through, was resumed. she was excluded from the room, whiledixon was admitted. margaret was not a ready lover, but where sheloved she loved passionately, and with no small degree of jealousy.
　　she went into her mother\"s bed-room, lust behind the drawing-room,and paced it up and down, while awaiting the doctor\"s coming out.
　　every now and then she stopped to listen; she fancied she heard a moan.
　　she clenched her hands tight, and held her breath. she was sure sheheard a moan. then all was still for a few minutes more; and then therewas the moving of chairs, the raised voices, all the little disturbances ofleave-taking.
　　when she heard the door open, she went quickly out of the bed-room.
　　\"my father is from home, dr. donaldson; he has to attend a pupil at thishour. may i trouble you to come into his room down stairs?\"
　　she saw, and triumphed over all the obstacles which dixon threw in herway; assuming her rightful position as daughter of the house insomething of the spirit of the elder brother, which quelled the oldservant\"s officiousness very effectually. margaret\"s consciousassumption of this unusual dignity of demeanour towards dixon, gaveher an instant\"s amusement in the midst of her anxiety. she knew, fromthe surprised expression on dixon\"s face, how ridiculously grand sheherself must be looking; and the idea carried her down stairs into theroom; it gave her that length of oblivion from the keen sharpness of therecollection of the actual business in hand. now, that came back, andseemed to take away her breath. it was a moment or two before shecould utter a word.
　　but she spoke with an air of command, as she asked:--\"
　　\"what is the matter with mamma? you will oblige me by telling thesimple truth.\" then, seeing a slight hesitation on the doctor\"s part, sheadded-\"
　　i am the only child she has--here, i mean. my father is not sufficientlyalarmed, i fear; and, therefore, if there is any serious apprehension, itmust be broken to him gently. i can do this. i can nurse my mother.
　　pray, speak, sir; to see your face, and not be able to read it, gives me aworse dread than i trust any words of yours will justify.\"
　　\"my dear young lady, your mother seems to have a most attentive andefficient servant, who is more like her friend--\"
　　\"i am her daughter, sir.\"
　　\"but when i tell you she expressly desired that you might not be told--\"
　　\"i am not good or patient enough to submit to the prohibition. besides, iam sure you are too wise--too experienced to have promised to keep thesecret.\"
　　\"well,\" said he, half-smiling, though sadly enough, \"there you are right. idid not promise. in fact, i fear, the secret will be known soon enoughwithout my revealing it.\"
　　he paused. margaret went very white, and compressed her lips a littlemore. otherwise not a feature moved. with the quick insight intocharacter, without which no medical man can rise to the eminence ofdr. donaldson, he saw that she would exact the full truth; that shewould know if one iota was withheld; and that the withholding wouldbe torture more acute than the knowledge of it. he spoke two shortsentences in a low voice, watching her all the time; for the pupils of hereyes dilated into a black horror and the whiteness of her complexionbecame livid. he ceased speaking. he waited for that look to go off,-forher gasping breath to come. then she said:-\"
　　i thank you most truly, sir, for your confidence. that dread has hauntedme for many weeks. it is a true, real agony. my poor, poor mother!\" herlips began to quiver, and he let her have the relief of tears, sure of herpower of self-control to check them.
　　a few tears--those were all she shed, before she recollected the manyquestions she longed to ask.
　　\"will there be much suffering?\"
　　he shook his head. \"that we cannot tell. it depends on constitution; on athousand things. but the late discoveries of medical science have givenus large power of alleviation.\"
　　\"my father!\" said margaret, trembling all over.
　　\"i do not know mr. hale. i mean, it is difficult to give advice. but ishould say, bear on, with the knowledge you have forced me to giveyou so abruptly, till the fact which i could not with-hold has become insome degree familiar to you, so that you may, without too great aneffort, be able to give what comfort you can to your father. before then,-my visits, which, of course, i shall repeat from time to time, although ifear i can do nothing but alleviate,--a thousand little circumstances willhave occurred to awaken his alarm, to deepen it--so that he will be allthe better prepared.--nay, my dear young lady--nay, my dear--i saw mr.
　　thornton, and i honour your father for the sacrifice he has made,however mistaken i may believe him to be. --well, this once, if it willplease you, my dear. only remember, when i come again, i come as afriend. and you must learn to look upon me as such, because seeingeach other--getting to know each other at such times as these, is worthyears of morning calls.\"
　　margaret could not speak for crying: but she wrung his hand at parting.
　　\"that\"s what i call a fine girl!\" thought dr. donaldson, when he wasseated in his carriage, and had time to examine his ringed hand, whichhad slightly suffered from her pressure. \"who would have thought thatlittle hand could have given such a squeeze? but the bones were wellput together, and that gives immense power. what a queen she is! withher head thrown back at first, to force me into speaking the truth; andthen bent so eagerly forward to listen. poor thing! i must see she doesnot overstrain herself. though it\"s astonishing how much those thoroughbredcreatures can do and suffer. that girl\"s game to the back-bone.




第53章 CHAPTER XVI THE SHADOW OF DEATH (2)


　　another, who had gone that deadly colour, could never have comeround without either fainting or hysterics. but she wouldn\"t do either-notshe! and the very force of her will brought her round. such a girl asthat would win my heart, if i were thirty years younger. it\"s too latenow. ah! here we are at the archers\".\" so out he jumped, with thought,wisdom, experience, sympathy, and ready to attend to the calls madeupon them by this family, just as if there were none other in the world.
　　meanwhile, margaret had returned into her father\"s study for a moment,to recover strength before going upstairs into her mother\"s presence.
　　\"oh, my god, my god! but this is terrible. how shall i bear it? such adeadly disease! no hope! oh, mamma, mamma, i wish i had never goneto aunt shaw\"s, and been all those precious years away from you! poormamma! how much she must have borne! oh, i pray thee, my god, thather sufferings may not be too acute, too dreadful. how shall i bear tosee them? how can i bear papa\"s agony? he must not be told yet; not allat once. it would kill him. but i won\"t lose another moment of my owndear, precious mother.\"
　　she ran upstairs. dixon was not in the room. mrs. hale lay back in aneasy chair, with a soft white shawl wrapped around her, and a becomingcap put on, in expectation of the doctor\"s visit. her face had a little faintcolour in it, and the very exhaustion after the examination gave it apeaceful look. margaret was surprised to see her look so calm.
　　\"why, margaret, how strange you look! what is the matter?\" and then,as the idea stole into her mind of what was indeed the real state of thecase, she added, as if a little displeased: \"you have not been seeing dr.
　　donaldson, and asking him any questions-- have you, child?\" margaretdid not reply--only looked wistfully towards her. mrs. hale becamemore displeased. \"he would not, surely, break his word to me, and\"-\"
　　oh yes, mamma, he did. i made him. it was i--blame me.\"she kneltdown by her mother\"s side, and caught her hand--she would not let it go,though mrs. hale tried to pull it away. she kept kissing it, and the hottears she shed bathed it.
　　\"margaret, it was very wrong of you. you knew i did not wish you toknow.\" but, as if tired with the contest, she left her hand in margaret\"s
　　clasp, and by-and-by she returned the pressure faintly. that encouragedmargaret to speak.
　　\"oh, mamma! let me be your nurse. i will learn anything dixon canteach me. but you know i am your child, and i do think i have a right todo everything for you.\"
　　\"you don\"t know what you are asking,\" said mrs. hale, with a shudder.
　　\"yes, i do. i know a great deal more than you are aware of let me beyour nurse. let me try, at any rate. no one has ever shall ever try sohard as i will do. it will be such a comfort, mamma.\"
　　\"my poor child! well, you shall try. do you know, margaret, dixon andi thought you would quite shrink from me if you knew--\"
　　\"dixon thought!\" said margaret, her lip curling. \"dixon could not giveme credit for enough true love--for as much as herself! she thought, isuppose, that i was one of those poor sickly women who like to lie onrose leaves, and be fanned all day; don\"t let dixon\"s fancies come anymore between you and me, mamma. don\"t, please!\" implored she.
　　\"don\"t be angry with dixon,\" said mrs. hale, anxiously. margaretrecovered herself.
　　\"no! i won\"t. i will try and be humble, and learn her ways, if you willonly let me do all i can for you. let me be in the first place, mother--iam greedy of that. i used to fancy you would forget me while i wasaway at aunt shaw\"s, and cry myself to sleep at nights with that notionin my head.\"
　　\"and i used to think, how will margaret bear our makeshift povertyafter the thorough comfort and luxury in harley street, till i have manya time been more ashamed of your seeing our contrivances at helstonethan of any stranger finding them out.\"
　　\"oh, mamma! and i did so enjoy them. they were so much moreamusing than all the jog-trot harley street ways. the wardrobe shelfwith handles, that served as a supper-tray on grand occasions! and theold tea-chests stuffed and covered for ottomans! i think what you callthe makeshift contrivances at dear helstone were a charming part of thelife there.\"
　　\"i shall never see helstone again, margaret,\" said mrs. hale, the tearswelling up into her eyes. margaret could not reply. mrs. hale went on.
　　\"while i was there, i was for ever wanting to leave it. every placeseemed pleasanter. and now i shall die far away from it. i am rightlypunished.\"
　　\"you must not talk so,\" said margaret, impatiently. \"he said you mightlive for years. oh, mother! we will have you back at helstone yet.\"
　　\"no never! that i must take as a just penance. but, margaret-frederick!\"
wwＷ、xiＡbook.cＯm



第54章 CHAPTER XVI THE SHADOW OF DEATH (3)


　　at the mention of that one word, she suddenly cried out loud, as in
　　some sharp agony. it seemed as if the thought of him upset all hercomposure, destroyed the calm, overcame the exhaustion. wildpassionate cry succeeded to cry--\"frederick! frederick! come to me. iam dying. little first-born child, come to me once again!\"
　　she was in violent hysterics. margaret went and called dixon in terror.
　　dixon came in a huff, and accused margaret of having over-excited hermother. margaret bore all meekly, only trusting that her father mightnot return. in spite of her alarm, which was even greater than theoccasion warranted, she obeyed all dixon\"s directions promptly andwell, without a word of self-justification. by so doing she mollified heraccuser. they put her mother to bed, and margaret sate by her till shefell asleep, and afterwards till dixon beckoned her out of the room, and,with a sour face, as if doing something against the grain, she bade herdrink a cup of coffee which she had prepared for her in the drawing-room, and stood over her in a commanding attitude as she did so.
　　\"you shouldn\"t have been so curious, miss, and then you wouldn\"t haveneeded to fret before your time. it would have come soon enough. andnow, i suppose, you\"ll tell master, and a pretty household i shall have ofyou!\"
　　\"no, dixon,\" said margaret, sorrowfully, \"i will not tell papa. he couldnot bear it as i can.\" and by way of proving how well she bore it, sheburst into tears.
　　\"ay! i knew how it would be. now you\"ll waken your mamma, just aftershe\"s gone to sleep so quietly. miss margaret my dear, i\"ve had to keepit down this many a week; and though i don\"t pretend i can love her asyou do, yet i loved her better than any other man, woman, or child--noone but master frederick ever came near her in my mind. ever sincelady beresford\"s maid first took me in to see her dressed out in whitecrape, and corn-ears, and scarlet poppies, and i ran a needle down intomy finger, and broke it in, and she tore up her worked pocket-handkerchief, after they\"d cut it out, and came in to wet the bandagesagain with lotion when she returned from the ball--where she\"d been theprettiest young lady of all--i\"ve never loved any one like her. i littlethought then that i should live to see her brought so low. i don\"t meanno reproach to nobody. many a one calls you pretty and handsome, andwhat not. even in this smoky place, enough to blind one\"s eyes, the owlscan see that. but you\"ll never be like your mother for beauty--never; notif you live to be a hundred.\"
　　\"mamma is very pretty still. poor mamma!\"
　　\"now don\"t ye set off again, or i shall give way at last\" (whimpering).
　　\"you\"ll never stand master\"s coming home, and questioning, at this rate.
　　go out and take a walk, and come in something like. many\"s the timei\"ve longed to walk it off--the thought of what was the matter with her,
　　and how it must all end.\"
　　\"oh, dixon!\" said margaret, \"how often i\"ve been cross with you, notknowing what a terrible secret you had to bear!\"
　　\"bless you, child! i like to see you showing a bit of a spirit. it\"s the goodold beresford blood. why, the last sir john but two shot his stewarddown, there where he stood, for just telling him that he\"d racked thetenants, and he\"d racked the tenants till he could get no more money offthem than he could get skin off a flint.\"
　　\"well, dixon, i won\"t shoot you, and i\"ll try not to be cross again.\"
　　\"you never have. if i\"ve said it at times, it has always been to myself,just in private, by way of making a little agreeable conversation, forthere\"s no one here fit to talk to. and when you fire up, you\"re the veryimage of master frederick. i could find in my heart to put you in apassion any day, just to see his stormy look coming like a great cloudover your face. but now you go out, miss. i\"ll watch over missus; and asfor master, his books are company enough for him, if he should comein.\"
　　\"i will go,\" said margaret. she hung about dixon for a minute or so, as ifafraid and irresolute; then suddenly kissing her, she went quickly out ofthe room.
　　\"bless her!\" said dixon. \"she\"s as sweet as a nut. there are three people ilove: it\"s missus, master frederick, and her. just them three. that\"s all.
　　the rest be hanged, for i don\"t know what they\"re in the world for.
　　master was born, i suppose, for to marry missus. if i thought he lovedher properly, i might get to love him in time. but he should ha\" made adeal more on her, and not been always reading, reading, thinking,thinking. see what it has brought him to! many a one who never readsnor thinks either, gets to be rector, and dean, and what not; and i daresay master might, if he\"d just minded missus, and let the weary readingand thinking alone.--there she goes\" (looking out of the window as sheheard the front door shut). \"poor young lady! her clothes look shabby towhat they did when she came to helstone a year ago. then she hadn\"t somuch as a darned stocking or a cleaned pair of gloves in all herwardrobe. and now--!\"
t  



第55章 CHAPTER XVII WHAT IS A STRIKE? (1)


　　\"there are briars besetting every path,which call for patient care;
　　there is a cross in every lot,and an earnest need for prayer.\"
　　anon.
　　margaret went out heavily and unwillingly enough. but the length of astreet--yes, the air of a milton street--cheered her young blood beforeshe reached her first turning. her step grew lighter, her lip redder. shebegan to take notice, instead of having her thoughts turned soexclusively inward. she saw unusual loiterers in the streets: men withtheir hands in their pockets sauntering along; loud-laughing and loud-spoken girls clustered together, apparently excited to high spirits, and aboisterous independence of temper and behaviour. the more ill-lookingof the men--the discreditable minority--hung about on the steps of thebeer-houses and gin-shops, smoking, and commenting pretty freely onevery passer-by. margaret disliked the prospect of the long walkthrough these streets, before she came to the fields which she hadplanned to reach. instead, she would go and see bessy higgins. itwould not be so refreshing as a quiet country walk, but still it wouldperhaps be doing the kinder thing.
　　nicholas higgins was sitting by the fire smoking, as she went in. bessywas rocking herself on the other side.
　　nicholas took the pipe out of his mouth, and standing up, pushed hischair towards margaret; he leant against the chimney piece in alounging attitude, while she asked bessy how she was.
　　\"hoo\"s rather down i\" th\" mouth in regard to spirits, but hoo\"s better inhealth. hoo doesn\"t like this strike. hoo\"s a deal too much set on peaceand quietness at any price.\"
　　\"this is th\" third strike i\"ve seen,\" said she, sighing, as if that was answerand explanation enough.
　　\"well, third time pays for all. see if we don\"t dang th\" masters this time.
　　see if they don\"t come, and beg us to come back at our own price. that\"sall. we\"ve missed it afore time, i grant yo\"; but this time we\"n laid ourplans desperate deep.\"
　　\"why do you strike?\" asked margaret. \"striking is leaving off work tillyou get your own rate of wages, is it not? you must not wonder at myignorance; where i come from i never heard of a strike.\"
　　\"i wish i were there,\" said bessy, wearily. \"but it\"s not for me to get sickand tired o\" strikes. this is the last i\"ll see. before it\"s ended i shall be inthe great city--the holy jerusalem.\"
　　\"hoo\"s so full of th\" life to come, hoo cannot think of th\" present. now i,yo\" see, am bound to do the best i can here. i think a bird i\" th\" hand isworth two i\" th\" bush. so them\"s the different views we take on th\" strike
　　question.\"
　　\"but,\" said margaret, \"if the people struck, as you call it, where i comefrom, as they are mostly all field labourers, the seed would not be sown,the hay got in, the corn reaped.\"
　　\"well?\" said he. he had resumed his pipe, and put his \"well\" in the formof an interrogation.
　　\"why,\" she went on, \"what would become of the farmers.\"
　　he puffed away. \"i reckon they\"d have either to give up their farms, or togive fair rate of wage.\"
　　\"suppose they could not, or would not do the last; they could not giveup their farms all in a minute, however much they might wish to do so;but they would have no hay, nor corn to sell that year; and where wouldthe money come from to pay the labourers\" wages the next?\"
　　still puffing away. at last he said:
　　\"i know nought of your ways down south. i have heerd they\"re a pack ofspiritless, down-trodden men; welly clemmed to death; too much dazedwi\" clemming to know when they\"re put upon. now, it\"s not so here. weknown when we\"re put upon; and we\"en too much blood in us to stand it.
　　we just take our hands fro\" our looms, and say, \"yo\" may clem us, butyo\"ll not put upon us, my masters!\" and be danged to \"em, they shan\"tthis time!\"
　　\"i wish i lived down south,\" said bessy.
　　\"there\"s a deal to bear there,\" said margaret. \"there are sorrows to beareverywhere. there is very hard bodily labour to be gone through, withvery little food to give strength.\"
　　\"but it\"s out of doors,\" said bessy. \"and away from the endless, endlessnoise, and sickening heat.\"
　　\"it\"s sometimes in heavy rain, and sometimes in bitter cold. a youngperson can stand it; but an old man gets racked with rheumatism, andbent and withered before his time; yet he must just work on the same, orelse go to the workhouse.\"
　　\"i thought yo\" were so taken wi\" the ways of the south country.\"
　　\"so i am,\" said margaret, smiling a little, as she found herself thuscaught. \"i only mean, bessy, there\"s good and bad in everything in thisworld; and as you felt the bad up here, i thought it was but fair youshould know the bad down there.\"
　　\"and yo\" say they never strike down there?\" asked nicholas, abruptly.
　　\"no!\" said margaret; \"i think they have too much sense.\"
　　\"an\" i think,\" replied he, dashing the ashes out of his pipe with so muchvehemence that it broke, \"it\"s not that they\"ve too much sense, but thatthey\"ve too little spirit.\"
　　\"o, father!\" said bessy, \"what have ye gained by striking? think of thatfirst strike when mother died--how we all had to clem--you the worst of
　　all; and yet many a one went in every week at the same wage, till allwere gone in that there was work for; and some went beggars all theirlives at after.\"
　　\"ay,\" said he. \"that there strike was badly managed. folk got into th\"
　　management of it, as were either fools or not true men. yo\"ll see, it\"ll bedifferent this time.\"
　　\"but all this time you\"ve not told me what you\"re striking for,\" saidmargaret, again.
　　\"why, yo\" see, there\"s five or six masters who have set themselves againpaying the wages they\"ve been paying these two years past, andflourishing upon, and getting richer upon. and now they come to us,and say we\"re to take less. and we won\"t. we\"ll just clem them to deathfirst; and see who\"ll work for \"em then. they\"ll have killed the goose thatlaid \"em the golden eggs, i reckon.\"
　　\"and so you plan dying, in order to be revenged upon them!\"
　　\"no,\" said he, \"i dunnot. i just look forward to the chance of dying at mypost sooner than yield. that\"s what folk call fine and honourable in asoldier, and why not in a poor weaver-chap?\"
　　\"but,\" said margaret, \"a soldier dies in the cause of the nation--in thecause of others.\"




第56章 CHAPTER XVII WHAT IS A STRIKE? (2)


　　he laughed grimly. \"my lass,\" said he, \"yo\"re but a young wench, butdon\"t yo\" think i can keep three people--that\"s bessy, and mary, and me-onsixteen shilling a week? dun yo\" think it\"s for mysel\" i\"m strikingwork at this time? it\"s just as much in the cause of others as yon soldier-onlym\"appen, the cause he dies for is just that of somebody he neverclapt eyes on, nor heerd on all his born days, while i take up johnboucher\"s cause, as lives next door but one, wi\" a sickly wife, and eightchilder, none on \"em factory age; and i don\"t take up his cause only,though he\"s a poor good-for-nought, as can only manage two looms at atime, but i take up th\" cause o\" justice. why are we to have less wagenow, i ask, than two year ago?\"
　　\"don\"t ask me,\" said margaret; \"i am very ignorant. ask some of yourmasters. surely they will give you a reason for it. it is not merely anarbitrary decision of theirs, come to without reason.\"
　　\"yo\"re just a foreigner, and nothing more,\" said he, contemptuously.
　　\"much yo\" know about it. ask th\" masters! they\"d tell us to mind ourown business, and they\"d mind theirs. our business being, yo\"
　　understand, to take the bated\" wage, and be thankful, and their businessto bate us down to clemming point, to swell their profits. that\"s what itis.\"
　　\"but said margaret, determined not to give way, although she saw shewas irritating him, \"the state of trade may be such as not to enable themto give you the same remuneration.
　　\"state o\" trade! that\"s just a piece o\" masters\" humbug. it\"s rate o\" wages iwas talking of. th\" masters keep th\" state o\" trade in their own hands;and just walk it forward like a black bug-a-boo, to frighten naughtychildren with into being good. i\"ll tell yo\" it\"s their part,--their cue, assome folks call it,--to beat us down, to swell their fortunes; and it\"s oursto stand up and fight hard,--not for ourselves alone, but for them roundabout us--for justice and fair play. we help to make their profits, andwe ought to help spend \"em. it\"s not that we want their brass so muchthis time, as we\"ve done many a time afore. we\"n getten money laid by;and we\"re resolved to stand and fall together; not a man on us will go infor less wage than th\" union says is our due. so i say, \"hooray for thestrike,\" and let thornton, and slickson, and hamper, and their set lookto it!\"
　　\"thornton!\" said margaret. \"mr. thornton of marlborough street?\"
　　\"aye! thornton o\" marlborough mill, as we call him.\"
　　\"he is one of the masters you are striving with, is he not? what sort of amaster is he?\"
　　\"did yo\" ever see a bulldog? set a bulldog on hind legs, and dress himup in coat and breeches, and yo\"n just getten john thornton.\"
　　\"nay,\" said margaret, laughing, \"i deny that. mr. thornton is plainenough, but he\"s not like a bulldog, with its short broad nose, andsnarling upper lip.\"
　　\"no! not in look, i grant yo\". but let john thornton get hold on a notion,and he\"ll stick to it like a bulldog; yo\" might pull him away wi\" a pitchforkere he\"d leave go. he\"s worth fighting wi\", is john thornton. as forslickson, i take it, some o\" these days he\"ll wheedle his men back wi\"
　　fair promises; that they\"ll just get cheated out of as soon as they\"re in hispower again. he\"ll work his fines well out on \"em, i\"ll warrant. he\"s asslippery as an eel, he is. he\"s like a cat,--as sleek, and cunning, andfierce. it\"ll never be an honest up and down fight wi\" him, as it will bewi\" thornton. thornton\"s as dour as a door-nail; an obstinate chap,every inch on him,--th\" oud bulldog!\"
　　\"poor bessy!\" said margaret, turning round to her. \"you sigh over it all.
　　you don\"t like struggling and fighting as your father does, do you?\"
　　\"no!\" said she, heavily. \"i\"m sick on it. i could have wished to have hadother talk about me in my latter days, than just the clashing andclanging and clattering that has wearied a\" my life long, about work andwages, and masters, and hands, and knobsticks.\"
　　\"poor wench! latter days be farred! thou\"rt looking a sight better alreadyfor a little stir and change. beside, i shall be a deal here to make it morelively for thee.\"
　　\"tobacco-smoke chokes me!\" said she, querulously.
　　\"then i\"ll never smoke no more i\" th\" house!\" he replied, tenderly. \"but
　　why didst thou not tell me afore, thou foolish wench?\"
　　she did not speak for a while, and then so low that only margaret heardher:
　　\"i reckon, he\"ll want a\" the comfort he can get out o\" either pipe or drinkafore he\"s done.\"
　　her father went out of doors, evidently to finish his pipe.
　　bessy said passionately,\"now am not i a fool,--am i not, miss?--there, i knew i ought for tokeep father at home, and away fro\" the folk that are always ready for totempt a man, in time o\" strike, to go drink,--and there my tongue mustneeds quarrel with this pipe o\" his\"n,--and he\"ll go off, i know he will,-asoften as he wants to smoke--and nobody knows where it\"ll end. iwish i\"d letten myself be choked first.\"
　　\"but does your father drink?\" asked margaret.
　　\"no--not to say drink,\" replied she, still in the same wild excited tone.
www.xiabook.com



第57章 CHAPTER XVII WHAT IS A STRIKE? (3)


　　\"but what win ye have? there are days wi\" you, as wi\" other folk, isuppose, when yo\" get up and go through th\" hours, just longing for a bitof a change--a bit of a fillip, as it were. i know i ha\" gone and bought afour-pounder out o\" another baker\"s shop to common on such days, justbecause i sickened at the thought of going on for ever wi\" the same sightin my eyes, and the same sound in my ears, and the same taste i\" mymouth, and the same thought (or no thought, for that matter) in myhead, day after day, for ever. i\"ve longed for to be a man to go spreeing,even it were only a tramp to some new place in search o\" work. andfather--all men--have it stronger in \"em than me to get tired o\" samenessand work for ever. and what is \"em to do? it\"s little blame to them ifthey do go into th\" gin-shop for to make their blood flow quicker, andmore lively, and see things they never see at no other time--pictures,and looking-glass, and such like. but father never was a drunkard,though maybe, he\"s got worse for drink, now and then. only yo\" see,\"
　　and now her voice took a mournful, pleading tone, \"at times o\" strikethere\"s much to knock a man down, for all they start so hopefully; andwhere\"s the comfort to come fro\"? he\"ll get angry and mad--they all do-andthen they get tired out wi\" being angry and mad, and maybe ha\"
　　done things in their passion they\"d be glad to forget. bless yo\"r sweetpitiful face! but yo\" dunnot know what a strike is yet.\"
　　\"come, bessy,\" said margaret, \"i won\"t say you\"re exaggerating, becausei don\"t know enough about it: but, perhaps, as you\"re not well, you\"reonly looking on one side, and there is another and a brighter to belooked to.\"
　　\"it\"s all well enough for yo\" to say so, who have lived in pleasant greenplaces all your life long, and never known want or care, or wickednesseither, for that matter.\"
　　\"take care,\" said margaret, her cheek flushing, and her eye lightening,\"how you judge, bessy. i shall go home to my mother, who is so ill--soill, bessy, that there\"s no outlet but death for her out of the prison of hergreat suffering; and yet i must speak cheerfully to my father, who hasno notion of her real state, and to whom the knowledge must comegradually. the only person--the only one who could sympathise withme and help me--whose presence could comfort my mother more thanany other earthly thing--is falsely accused--would run the risk of deathif he came to see his dying mother. this i tell you--only you, bessy.
　　you must not mention it. no other person in milton--hardly any otherperson in england knows. have i not care? do i not know anxiety,though i go about well-dressed, and have food enough? oh, bessy, godis just, and our lots are well portioned out by him, although none buthe knows the bitterness of our souls.\"
　　\"i ask your pardon,\" replied bessy, humbly. \"sometimes, when i\"vethought o\" my life, and the little pleasure i\"ve had in it, i\"ve believedthat, maybe, i was one of those doomed to die by the falling of a starfrom heaven; \"and the name of the star is called wormwood;\" and thethird part of the waters became wormwood; and men died of the waters,because they were made bitter.\" one can bear pain and sorrow better ifone thinks it has been prophesied long before for one: somehow, then itseems as if my pain was needed for the fulfilment; otherways it seemsall sent for nothing.\"
　　\"nay, bessy--think!\" said margaret. \"god does not willingly afflict. don\"tdwell so much on the prophecies, but read the clearer parts of the bible.\"
　　\"i dare say it would be wiser; but where would i hear such grand wordsof promise--hear tell o\" anything so far different fro\" this dreary world,and this town above a\", as in revelations? many\"s the time i\"ve repeatedthe verses in the seventh chapter to myself, just for the sound. it\"s asgood as an organ, and as different from every day, too. no, i cannotgive up revelations. it gives me more comfort than any other book i\"
　　the bible.\"
　　\"let me come and read you some of my favourite chapters.\"
　　\"ay,\" said she, greedily, \"come. father will maybe hear yo\". he\"s deavedwi\" my talking; he says it\"s all nought to do with the things o\" to-day,and that\"s his business.\"
　　\"where is your sister?\"
　　\"gone fustian-cutting. i were loth to let her go; but somehow we mustlive; and th\" union can\"t afford us much.\"
　　\"now i must go. you have done me good, bessy.\"
　　\"i done you good!\"
　　\"yes. i came here very sad, and rather too apt to think my own cause forgrief was the only one in the world. and now i hear how you have had
　　to bear for years, and that makes me stronger.\"
　　\"bless yo\"! i thought a\" the good-doing was on the side of gentle folk. ishall get proud if i think i can do good to yo\".\"
　　\"you won\"t do it if you think about it. but you\"ll only puzzle yourself ifyou do, that\"s one comfort.\"
　　\"yo\"re not like no one i ever seed. i dunno what to make of yo\".\"
　　\"nor i of myself. good-bye!\"
　　bessy stilled her rocking to gaze after her.
　　\"i wonder if there are many folk like her down south. she\"s like a breathof country air, somehow. she freshens me up above a bit. who\"d ha\"
　　thought that face--as bright and as strong as the angel i dream of--couldhave known the sorrow she speaks on? i wonder how she\"ll sin. all onus must sin. i think a deal on her, for sure. but father does the like, isee. and mary even. it\"s not often hoo\"s stirred up to notice much.\"
www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ



第58章 CHAPTER XVIII LIKES AND DISLIKES (1)


　　\"my heart revolts within me, and two voicesmake themselves audible within my bosom.\"
　　wallenstein.
　　on margaret\"s return home she found two letters on the table: one was anote for her mother,--the other, which had come by the post, wasevidently from her aunt shaw--covered with foreign post-marks--thin,silvery, and rustling. she took up the other, and was examining it, whenher father came in suddenly:
　　\"so your mother is tired, and gone to bed early! i\"m afraid, such athundery day was not the best in the world for the doctor to see her.
　　what did he say? dixon tells me he spoke to you about her.\"
　　margaret hesitated. her father\"s looks became more grave and anxious:
　　\"he does not think her seriously ill?\"
　　\"not at present; she needs care, he says; he was very kind, and said hewould call again, and see how his medicines worked.\"
　　\"only care--he did not recommend change of air?--he did not say thissmoky town was doing her any harm, did he, margaret?\"
　　\"no! not a word,\" she replied, gravely. \"he was anxious, i think.\"
　　\"doctors have that anxious manner; it\"s professional,\" said he.
　　margaret saw, in her father\"s nervous ways, that the first impression ofpossible danger was made upon his mind, in spite of all his making light
　　of what she told him. he could not forget the subject,--could not passfrom it to other things; he kept recurring to it through the evening, withan unwillingness to receive even the slightest unfavourable idea, whichmade margaret inexpressibly sad.
　　\"this letter is from aunt shaw, papa. she has got to naples, and finds ittoo hot, so she has taken apartments at sorrento. but i don\"t think shelikes italy.\"
　　\"he did not say anything about diet, did he?\"
　　\"it was to be nourishing, and digestible. mamma\"s appetite is prettygood, i think.\"
　　\"yes! and that makes it all the more strange he should have thought ofspeaking about diet.\"
　　\"i asked him, papa.\" another pause. then margaret went on: \"aunt shawsays, she has sent me some coral ornaments, papa; but,\" added margaret,half smiling, \"she\"s afraid the milton dissenters won\"t appreciate them.
　　she has got all her ideas of dissenters from the quakers, has not she?\"
　　\"if ever you hear or notice that your mother wishes for anything, be sureyou let me know. i am so afraid she does not tell me always what shewould like. pray, see after that girl mrs. thornton named. if we had agood, efficient house-servant, dixon could be constantly with her, andi\"d answer for it we\"d soon set her up amongst us, if care will do it. she\"sbeen very much tired of late, with the hot weather, and the difficulty ofgetting a servant. a little rest will put her quite to rights--eh, margaret?\"
　　\"i hope so,\" said margaret,--but so sadly, that her father took notice of it.
　　he pinched her cheek.
　　\"come; if you look so pale as this, i must rouge you up a little. takecare of yourself, child, or you\"ll be wanting the doctor next.\"
　　but he could not settle to anything that evening. he was continuallygoing backwards and forwards, on laborious tiptoe, to see if his wifewas still asleep. margaret\"s heart ached at his restlessness--his trying tostifle and strangle the hideous fear that was looming out of the darkplaces of his heart.
　　he came back at last, somewhat comforted.
　　\"she\"s awake now, margaret. she quite smiled as she saw me standingby her. just her old smile. and she says she feels refreshed, and readyfor tea. where\"s the note for her? she wants to see it. i\"ll read it to herwhile you make tea.\"
　　the note proved to be a formal invitation from mrs. thornton, to mr.,mrs., and miss hale to dinner, on the twenty-first instant. margaret wassurprised to find an acceptance contemplated, after all she had learnt ofsad probabilities during the day. but so it was. the idea of herhusband\"s and daughter\"s going to this dinner had quite captivated mrs.
　　hale\"s fancy, even before margaret had heard the contents of the note. it
　　was an event to diversify the monotony of the invalid\"s life; and sheclung to the idea of their going, with even fretful pertinacity whenmargaret objected.
　　\"nay, margaret? if she wishes it, i\"m sure we\"ll both go willingly. shenever would wish it unless she felt herself really stronger--really betterthan we thought she was, eh, margaret?\" said mr. hale, anxiously, asshe prepared to write the note of acceptance, the next day.
　　\"eh! margaret?\" questioned he, with a nervous motion of his hands. itseemed cruel to refuse him the comfort he craved for. and besides, hispassionate refusal to admit the existence of fear, almost inspiredmargaret herself with hope.
　　\"i do think she is better since last night,\" said she. \"her eyes lookbrighter, and her complexion clearer.\"
　　\"god bless you,\" said her father, earnestly. \"but is it true? yesterday wasso sultry every one felt ill. it was a most unlucky day for mr. donaldsonto see her on.\"
　　so he went away to his day\"s duties, now increased by the preparationof some lectures he had promised to deliver to the working people at aneighbouring lyceum. he had chosen ecclesiastical architecture as hissubject, rather more in accordance with his own taste and knowledgethan as falling in with the character of the place or the desire forparticular kinds of information among those to whom he was to lecture.
　　and the institution itself, being in debt, was only too glad to get a gratiscourse from an educated and accomplished man like mr. hale, let thesubject be what it might.
　　\"well, mother,\" asked mr. thornton that night, \"who have accepted yourinvitations for the twenty-first?\"
　　\"fanny, where are the notes? the slicksons accept, collingbrooksaccept, stephenses accept, browns decline. hales--father and daughtercome,--mother too great an invalid--macphersons come, and mr.
　　horsfall, and mr. young. i was thinking of asking the porters, as thebrowns can\"t come.\"
　　\"very good. do you know, i\"m really afraid mrs. hale is very far fromwell, from what dr. donaldson says.\"
　　\"it\"s strange of them to accept a dinner-invitation if she\"s very ill,\" saidfanny.
　　\"i didn\"t say very ill,\" said her brother, rather sharply. \"i only said very farfrom well. they may not know it either.\" and then he suddenlyremembered that, from what dr. donaldson had told him, margaret, atany rate, must be aware of the exact state of the case.




第59章 CHAPTER XVIII LIKES AND DISLIKES (2)


　　\"very probably they are quite aware of what you said yesterday, john-ofthe great advantage it would be to them--to mr. hale, i mean, to beintroduced to such people as the stephenses and the collingbrooks.\"
　　\"i\"m sure that motive would not influence them. no! i think i understandhow it is.\"
　　\"john!\" said fanny, laughing in her little, weak, nervous way. \"how youprofess to understand these hales, and how you never will allow thatwe can know anything about them. are they really so very different tomost people one meets with?\"
　　she did not mean to vex him; but if she had intended it, she could nothave done it more thoroughly. he chafed in silence, however, notdeigning to reply to her question.
　　\"they do not seem to me out of the common way,\" said mrs. thornton.
　　\"he appears a worthy kind of man enough; rather too simple for trade-soit\"s perhaps as well he should have been a clergyman first, and now ateacher. she\"s a bit of a fine lady, with her invalidism; and as for the girl-she\"s the only one who puzzles me when i think about her,--which idon\"t often do. she seems to have a great notion of giving herself airs;and i can\"t make out why. i could almost fancy she thinks herself toogood for her company at times. and yet they\"re not rich, from all i canhear they never have been.\"
　　\"and she\"s not accomplished, mamma. she can\"t play.\"
　　\"go on, fanny. what else does she want to bring her up to yourstandard?\"
　　\"nay! john,\" said his mother, \"that speech of fanny\"s did no harm. imyself heard miss hale say she could not play. if you would let usalone, we could perhaps like her, and see her merits.\"
　　\"i\"m sure i never could!\" murmured fanny, protected by her mother. mr.
　　thornton heard, but did not care to reply. he was walking up and downthe dining-room, wishing that his mother would order candles, andallow him to set to work at either reading or writing, and so put a stopto the conversation. but he never thought of interfering in any of thesmall domestic regulations that mrs. thornton observed, in habitualremembrance of her old economies.
　　\"mother,\" said he, stopping, and bravely speaking out the truth, \"i wishyou would like miss hale.\"
　　\"why?\" asked she, startled by his earnest, yet tender manner. \"you\"renever thinking of marrying her?--a girl without a penny.\"
　　\"she would never have me,\" said he, with a short laugh.
　　\"no, i don\"t think she would,\" answered his mother. \"she laughed in myface, when i praised her for speaking out something mr. bell had saidin your favour. i liked the girl for doing it so frankly, for it made mesure she had no thought of you; and the next minute she vexed me so byseeming to think----well, never mind! only you\"re right in saying she\"stoo good an opinion of herself to think of you. the saucy jade! i shouldlike to know where she\"d find a better!\"
　　if these words hurt her son, the dusky light prevented him frombetraying any emotion. in a minute he came up quite cheerfully to hismother, and putting one hand lightly on her shoulder, said:
　　\"well, as i\"m just as much convinced of the truth of what you have beensaying as you can be; and as i have no thought or expectation of everasking her to be my wife, you\"ll believe me for the future that i\"m quitedisinterested in speaking about her. i foresee trouble for that girl-perhapswant of motherly care--and i only wish you to be ready to be afriend to her, in case she needs one. now, fanny,\" said he, \"i trust youhave delicacy enough to understand, that it is as great an injury to misshale as to me--in fact, she would think it a greater--to suppose that ihave any reason, more than i now give, for begging you and my motherto show her every kindly attention.\"
　　\"i cannot forgive her her pride,\" said his mother; \"i will befriend her, ifthere is need, for your asking, john. i would befriend jezebel herself ifyou asked me. but this girl, who turns up her nose at us all--who turnsup her nose at you----\"
　　\"nay, mother; i have never yet put myself, and i mean never to putmyself, within reach of her contempt.\"
　　\"contempt, indeed!\"--(one of mrs. thornton\"s expressive snorts.)--\"don\"tgo on speaking of miss hale, john, if i\"ve to be kind to her. when i\"mwith her, i don\"t know if i like or dislike her most; but when i think ofher, and hear you talk of her, i hate her. i can see she\"s given herself airsto you as well as if you\"d told me out.\"
　　\"and if she has,\" said he--and then he paused for a moment--then wenton: \"i\"m not a lad, to be cowed by a proud look from a woman, or to carefor her misunderstanding me and my position. i can laugh at it!\"
　　\"to be sure! and at her too, with her fine notions and haughty tosses!\"
　　\"i only wonder why you talk so much about her, then,\" said fanny. \"i\"msure, i\"m tired enough of the subject.\"
　　\"well!\" said her brother, with a shade of bitterness. \"suppose we findsome more agreeable subject. what do you say to a strike, by way ofsomething pleasant to talk about?\"
　　\"have the hands actually turned out?\" asked mrs. thornton, with vividinterest.
　　\"hamper\"s men are actually out. mine are working out their week,through fear of being prosecuted for breach of contract i\"d have hadevery one of them up and punished for it, that left his work before histime was out.\"
　　\"the law expenses would have been more than the hands them selveswere worth--a set of ungrateful naughts!\" said his mother.




第60章 CHAPTER XVIII LIKES AND DISLIKES (3)


　　\"to be sure. but i\"d have shown them how i keep my word, and how imean them to keep theirs. they know me by this time. slickson\"s men
　　are off--pretty certain he won\"t spend money in getting them punished.
　　we\"re in for a turn-out, mother.\"
　　\"i hope there are not many orders in hand?\"
　　\"of course there are. they know that well enough. but they don\"t quiteunderstand all, though they think they do.\"
　　\"what do you mean, john?\"
　　candles had been brought, and fanny had taken up her interminablepiece of worsted-work, over which she was yawning; throwing herselfback in her chair, from time to time, to gaze at vacancy, and think ofnothing at her ease.
　　\"why,\" said he, \"the americans are getting their yarns so into the generalmarket, that our only chance is producing them at a lower rate. if wecan\"t, we may shut up shop at once, and hands and masters go alike ontramp. yet these fools go back to the prices paid three years ago--nay,some of their leaders quote dickinson\"s prices now--though they knowas well as we do that, what with fines pressed out of their wages as nohonourable man would extort them, and other ways which i for onewould scorn to use, the real rate of wage paid at dickinson\"s is less thanat ours. upon my word, mother, i wish the old combination-laws werein force. it is too bad to find out that fools--ignorant wayward men likethese--just by uniting their weak silly heads, are to rule over thefortunes of those who bring all the wisdom that knowledge andexperience, and often painful thought and anxiety, can give. the nextthing will be--indeed, we\"re all but come to it now--that we shall have togo and ask--stand hat in hand--and humbly ask the secretary of thespinner\" union to be so kind as to furnish us with labour at their ownprice. that\"s what they want--they, who haven\"t the sense to see that, ifwe don\"t get a fair share of the profits to compensate us for our wearand tear here in england, we can move off to some other country; andthat, what with home and foreign competition, we are none of us likelyto make above a fair share, and may be thankful enough if we can getthat, in an average number of years.\"
　　\"can\"t you get hands from ireland? i wouldn\"t keep these fellows a day.
　　i\"d teach them that i was master, and could employ what servants iliked.\"
　　\"yes! to be sure, i can; and i will, too, if they go on long. it will betrouble and expense, and i fear there will be some danger; but i will doit, rather than give in.\"
　　\"if there is to be all this extra expense, i\"m sorry we\"re giving a dinnerjust now.\"
　　\"so am i,--not because of the expense, but because i shall have much tothink about, and many unexpected calls on my time. but we must havehad mr. horsfall, and he does not stay in milton long. and as for the
　　others, we owe them dinners, and it\"s all one trouble.\"
　　he kept on with his restless walk--not speaking any more, but drawinga deep breath from time to time, as if endeavouring to throw off someannoying thought. fanny asked her mother numerous small questions,all having nothing to do with the subject, which a wiser person wouldhave perceived was occupying her attention. consequently, shereceived many short answers. she was not sorry when, at ten o\"clock,the servants filed in to prayers. these her mother always read,--firstreading a chapter. they were now working steadily through the oldtestament. when prayers were ended, and his mother had wished himgoodnight, with that long steady look of hers which conveyed noexpression of the tenderness that was in her heart, but yet had theintensity of a blessing, mr. thornton continued his walk. all hisbusiness plans had received a check, a sudden pull-up, from thisapproaching turn-out. the forethought of many anxious hours wasthrown away, utterly wasted by their insane folly, which would injurethemselves even more than him, though no one could set any limit tothe mischief they were doing. and these were the men who thoughtthemselves fitted to direct the masters in the disposal of their capital!
　　hamper had said, only this very day, that if he were ruined by thestrike, he would start life again, comforted by the conviction that thosewho brought it on were in a worse predicament than he himself,--for hehad head as well as hands, while they had only hands; and if they droveaway their market, they could not follow it, nor turn to anything else.
　　but this thought was no consolation to mr. thornton. it might be thatrevenge gave him no pleasure; it might be that he valued the position hehad earned with the sweat of his brow, so much that he keenly felt itsbeing endangered by the ignorance or folly of others,--so keenly that hehad no thoughts to spare for what would he the consequences of theirconduct to themselves. he paced up and down, setting his teeth a littlenow and then. at last it struck two. the candles were flickering in theirsockets. he lighted his own, muttering to himself:
　　\"once for all, they shall know whom they have got to deal with. i cangive them a fortnight,--no more. if they don\"t see their madness beforethe end of that time, i must have hands from ireland. i believe it\"sslickson\"s doing,--confound him and his dodges! he thought he wasoverstocked; so he seemed to yield at first, when the deputation came tohim,--and of course, he only confirmed them in their folly, as he meantto do. that\"s where it spread from.\"
wwＷ．7wenxue.com  http://www.xiaboＯk.com



第61章 CHAPTER XIX ANGEL VISITS (1)


　　\"as angels in some brighter dreamscall to the soul when man doth sleep,so some strange thoughts transcend our wonted themes,and into glory peep.\"
　　henry vaughan.
　　mrs. hale was curiously amused and interested by the idea of thethornton dinner party. she kept wondering about the details, withsomething of the simplicity of a little child, who wants to have all itsanticipated pleasures described beforehand. but the monotonous life ledby invalids often makes them like children, inasmuch as they haveneither of them any sense of proportion in events, and seem each tobelieve that the walls and curtains which shut in their world, and shutout everything else, must of necessity be larger than anything hiddenbeyond. besides, mrs. hale had had her vanities as a girl; had perhapsunduly felt their mortification when she became a poor clergyman\"swife;--they had been smothered and kept down; but they were notextinct; and she liked to think of seeing margaret dressed for a party,and discussed what she should wear, with an unsettled anxiety thatamused margaret, who had been more accustomed to society in her onein harley street than her mother in five and twenty years of helstone.
　　\"then you think you shall wear your white silk. are you sure it will fit?
　　it\"s nearly a year since edith was married!\"
　　\"oh yes, mamma! mrs. murray made it, and it\"s sure to be right; it maybe a straw\"s breadth shorter or longer-waisted, according to my havinggrown fat or thin. but i don\"t think i\"ve altered in the least.\"
　　\"hadn\"t you better let dixon see it? it may have gone yellow with lyingby.\"
　　\"if you like, mamma. but if the worst comes to the worst, i\"ve a verynice pink gauze which aunt shaw gave me, only two or three monthsbefore edith was married. that can\"t have gone yellow.\"
　　\"no! but it may have faded.\"
　　\"well! then i\"ve a green silk. i feel more as if it was the embarrassmentof riches.\"
　　\"i wish i knew what you ought to wear,\" said mrs. hale, nervously.
　　margaret\"s manner changed instantly. \"shall i go and put them on oneafter another, mamma, and then you could see which you liked best?\"
　　\"but--yes! perhaps that will be best.\"
　　so off margaret went. she was very much inclined to play some pranks
　　when she was dressed up at such an unusual hour; to make her richwhite silk balloon out into a cheese, to retreat backwards from hermother as if she were the queen; but when she found that these freaks ofhers were regarded as interruptions to the serious business, and as suchannoyed her mother, she became grave and sedate. what had possessedthe world (her world) to fidget so about her dress, she could notunderstand; but that very after noon, on naming her engagement tobessy higgins (apropos of the servant that mrs. thornton had promisedto inquire about), bessy quite roused up at the intelligence.
　　\"dear! and are you going to dine at thornton\"s at marlborough mills?\"
　　\"yes, bessy. why are you so surprised?\"
　　\"oh, i dunno. but they visit wi\" a\" th\" first folk in milton.\"
　　\"and you don\"t think we\"re quite the first folk in milton, eh, bessy?\"
　　bessy\"s cheeks flushed a little at her thought being thus easily read.
　　\"well,\" said she, \"yo\" see, they thinken a deal o\" money here and i reckonyo\"ve not getten much.\"
　　\"no,\" said margaret, \"that\"s very true. but we are educated people, andhave lived amongst educated people. is there anything so wonderful, inour being asked out to dinner by a man who owns himself inferior tomy father by coming to him to be instructed? i don\"t mean to blame mr.
　　thornton. few drapers\" assistants, as he was once, could have madethemselves what he is.\"
　　\"but can yo\" give dinners back, in yo\"r small house ? thornton\"s house isthree times as big.\"
　　\"well, i think we could manage to give mr. thornton a dinner back, asyou call it. perhaps not in such a large room, nor with so many people.
　　but i don\"t think we\"ve thought about it at all in that way.\"
　　\"i never thought yo\"d be dining with thorntons,\" repeated i bessy. \"why,the mayor hissel\" dines there; and the members of parliament and all.\"
　　\"i think i could support the honour of meeting the mayor of milton.
　　\"but them ladies dress so grand!\" said bessy, with an anxious look atmargaret\"s print gown, which her milton eyes appraised at sevenpence ayard.
　　margaret\"s face dimpled up into a merry laugh. \"thank you, bessy, forthinking so kindly about my looking nice among all the smart people.
　　but i\"ve plenty of grand gowns,--a week ago, i should have said theywere far too grand for anything i should ever want again. but as i\"m todine at mr. thornton\"s, and perhaps to meet the mayor, i shall put onmy very best gown, you may be sure.\"
　　\"what win yo\" wear?\" asked bessy, somewhat relieved.
　　\"white silk,\" said margaret. \"a gown i had for a cousin\"s wedding, a yearago.
　　\"that\"ll do!\" said bessy, falling back in her chair. \"i should be loth to
　　have yo\" looked down upon.
　　\"oh! i\"ll be fine enough, if that will save me from being looked downupon in milton.\"
　　\"i wish i could see you dressed up,\" said bessy. \"i reckon, yo\"re not whatfolk would ca\" pretty; yo\"ve not red and white enough for that. but dunyo\" know, i ha\" dreamt of yo\", long afore ever i seed yo\".\"
　　\"nonsense, bessy!\"
　　\"ay, but i did. yo\"r very face,--looking wi\" yo\"r clear steadfast eyes outo\" th\" darkness, wi\" yo\"r hair blown off from yo\"r brow, and going outlike rays round yo\"r forehead, which was just as smooth and as straightas it is now,--and yo\" always came to give me strength, which i seemedto gather out o\" yo\"r deep comforting eyes,--and yo\" were drest inshining raiment--just as yo\"r going to be drest. so, yo\" see, it was yo\"!\"
　　\"nay, bessy,\" said margaret, gently, \"it was but a dream.\"
　　\"and why might na i dream a dream in my affliction as well as others?
　　did not many a one i\" the bible? ay, and see visions too! why, even myfather thinks a deal o\" dreams! i tell yo\" again, i saw yo\" as plainly,coming swiftly towards me, wi\" yo\"r hair blown back wi\" the veryswiftness o\" the motion, just like the way it grows, a little standing offlike; and the white shining dress on yo\"ve getten to wear. let me comeand see yo\" in it. i want to see yo\" and touch yo\" as in very deed yo\" werein my dream.\"
　　\"my dear bessy, it is quite a fancy of yours.\"
　　\"fancy or no fancy,--yo\"ve come, as i knew yo\" would, when i saw yo\"rmovement in my dream,--and when yo\"re here about me, i reckon i feeleasier in my mind, and comforted, just as a fire comforts one on a dreeday. yo\" said it were on th\" twenty-first; please god, i\"ll come and seeyo\".\"




第62章 CHAPTER XIX ANGEL VISITS (2)


　　\"oh bessy! you may come and welcome; but don\"t talk so--it reallymakes me sorry. it does indeed.\"
　　\"then i\"ll keep it to mysel\", if i bite my tongue out. not but what it\"s truefor all that.\"
　　margaret was silent. at last she said,\"let us talk about it sometimes, if you think it true. but not now. tellme, has your father turned out?\"
　　\"ay!\" said bessy, heavily--in a manner very different from that she hadspoken in but a minute or two before. \"he and many another,--allhamper\"s men,--and many a one besides. th\" women are as bad as th\"
　　men, in their savageness, this time. food is high,--and they mun havefood for their childer, i reckon. suppose thorntons sent \"em their dinnerout,--th\" same money, spent on potatoes and meal, would keep many acrying babby quiet, and hush up its mother\"s heart for a bit!\"
　　\"don\"t speak so!\" said margaret. \"you\"ll make me feel wicked and guilty
　　in going to this dinner.\"
　　\"no!\" said bessy. \"some\"s pre-elected to sumptuous feasts, and purpleand fine linen,--may be yo\"re one on \"em. others toil and moil all theirlives long--and the very dogs are not pitiful in our days, as they were inthe days of lazarus. but if yo\" ask me to cool yo\"r tongue wi\" th\" tip ofmy finger, i\"ll come across the great gulf to yo\" just for th\" thought o\"
　　what yo\"ve been to me here.\"
　　\"bessy! you\"re very feverish! i can tell it in the touch of your hand, aswell as in what you\"re saying. it won\"t be division enough, in that awfulday, that some of us have been beggars here, and some of us have beenrich,--we shall not be judged by that poor accident, but by our faithfulfollowing of christ.\"
　　margaret got up, and found some water and soaking her pocket-handkerchief in it, she laid the cool wetness on bessy\"s forehead, andbegan to chafe the stone-cold feet. bessy shut her eyes, and allowedherself to be soothed. at last she said,\"yo\"d ha\" been deaved out o\" yo\"r five wits, as well as me, if yo\"d had onebody after another coming in to ask for father, and staying to tell meeach one their tale. some spoke o\" deadly hatred, and made my bloodrun cold wi\" the terrible things they said o\" th\" masters,--but more, beingwomen, kept plaining, plaining (wi\" the tears running down theircheeks, and never wiped away, nor heeded), of the price o\" meat, andhow their childer could na sleep at nights for th\" hunger.\"
　　\"and do they think the strike will mend this?\" asked margaret.
　　\"they say so,\" replied bessy. \"they do say trade has been good for long,and the masters has made no end o\" money; how much father doesn\"tknow, but, in course, th\" union does; and, as is natural, they wantentheir share o\" th\" profits, now that food is getting dear; and th\" unionsays they\"ll not be doing their duty if they don\"t make the masters give\"em their share. but masters has getten th\" upper hand somehow; and i\"mfeared they\"ll keep it now and evermore. it\"s like th\" great battle o\"
　　armageddon, the way they keep on, grinning and fighting at each other,till even while they fight, they are picked off into the pit.\"
　　just then, nicholas higgins came in. he caught his daughter\"s lastwords.
　　\"ay! and i\"ll fight on too; and i\"ll get it this time. it\"ll not take long for tomake \"em give in, for they\"ve getten a pretty lot of orders, all undercontract; and they\"ll soon find out they\"d better give us our five per centthan lose the profit they\"ll gain; let alone the fine for not fulfilling thecontract. aha, my masters! i know who\"ll win.\"
　　margaret fancied from his manner that he must have been drinking, notso much from what he said, as from the excited way in which he spoke;and she was rather confirmed in this idea by the evident anxiety bessy
　　showed to hasten her departure. bessy said to her,-\"
　　the twenty-first--that\"s thursday week. i may come and see yo\" dressedfor thornton\"s, i reckon. what time is yo\"r dinner?\"
　　before margaret could answer, higgins broke out,\"thornton\"s! ar\" t\" going to dine at thornton\"s? ask him to give yo\" abumper to the success of his orders. by th\" twenty-first, i reckon, he\"llbe pottered in his brains how to get \"em done in time. tell him, there\"sseven hundred\"ll come marching into marlborough mills, the morningafter he gives the five per cent, and will help him through his contract inno time. you\"ll have \"em all there. my master, hamper. he\"s one o\" th\"
　　oud-fashioned sort. ne\"er meets a man bout an oath or a curse; i shouldthink he were going to die if he spoke me civil; but arter all, his bark\"swaur than his bite, and yo\" may tell him one o\" his turn-outs said so, ifyo\" like. eh! but yo\"ll have a lot of prize mill-owners at thornton\"s! ishould like to get speech o\" them, when they\"re a bit inclined to sit stillafter dinner, and could na run for the life on \"em. i\"d tell \"em my mind.
　　i\"d speak up again th\" hard way they\"re driving on us!\"
　　\"good-bye!\" said margaret, hastily. \"good-bye, bessy! i shall look to seeyou on the twenty-first, if you\"re well enough.\"
　　the medicines and treatment which dr. donaldson had ordered for mrs.
　　hale, did her so much good at first that not only she herself, butmargaret, began to hope that he might have been mistaken, and that shecould recover permanently. as for mr. hale, although he had never hadan idea of the serious nature of their apprehensions, he triumphed overtheir fears with an evident relief, which proved how much his glimpseinto the nature of them had affected him. only dixon croaked for everinto margaret\"s ear. however, margaret defied the raven, and wouldhope.
下*书 网



第63章 CHAPTER XIX ANGEL VISITS (3)


　　they needed this gleam of brightness in-doors, for out-of-doors, even totheir uninstructed eyes, there was a gloomy brooding appearance ofdiscontent. mr. hale had his own acquaintances among the workingmen, and was depressed with their earnestly told tales of suffering andlong-endurance. they would have scorned to speak of what they had tobear to any one who might, from his position, have understood itwithout their words. but here was this man, from a distant county, whowas perplexed by the workings of the system into the midst of which hewas thrown, and each was eager to make him a judge, and to bringwitness of his own causes for irritation. then mr. hale brought all hisbudget of grievances, and laid it before mr. thornton, for him, with hisexperience as a master, to arrange them, and explain their origin; whichhe always did, on sound economical principles; showing that, as tradewas conducted, there must always be a waxing and waning ofcommercial prosperity; and that in the waning a certain number of
　　masters, as well as of men, must go down into ruin, and be no moreseen among the ranks of the happy and prosperous. he spoke as if thisconsequence were so entirely logical, that neither employers noremployed had any right to complain if it became their fate: theemployer to turn aside from the race he could no longer run, with abitter sense of incompetency and failure--wounded in the struggle-trampleddown by his fellows in their haste to get rich--slighted wherehe once was honoured--humbly asking for, instead of bestowing,employment with a lordly hand. of course, speaking so of the fate that,as a master, might be his own in the fluctuations of commerce, he wasnot likely to have more sympathy with that of the workmen, who werepassed by in the swift merciless improvement or alteration who wouldfain lie down and quietly die out of the world that needed them not, butfelt as if they could never rest in their graves for the clinging cries ofthe beloved and helpless they would leave behind; who envied thepower of the wild bird, that can feed her young with her very heart\"sblood. margaret\"s whole soul rose up against him while he reasoned inthis way--as if commerce were everything and humanity nothing. shecould hardly, thank him for the individual kindness, which brought himthat very evening to offer her--for the delicacy which made himunderstand that he must offer her privately--every convenience forillness that his own wealth or his mother\"s foresight had caused them toaccumulate in their household, and which, as he learnt from dr.
　　donaldson, mrs. hale might possibly require. his presence, after theway he had spoken--his bringing before her the doom, which she wasvainly trying to persuade herself might yet be averted from her mother-allconspired to set margaret\"s teeth on edge, as she looked at him, andlistened to him. what business had he to be the only person, except dr.
　　donaldson and dixon, admitted to the awful secret, which she held shutup in the most dark and sacred recess of her heart--not daring to look atit, unless she invoked heavenly strength to bear the sight--that, someday soon, she should cry aloud for her mother, and no answer wouldcome out of the blank, dumb darkness? yet he knew all. she saw it inhis pitying eyes. she heard it in his grave and tremulous voice. howreconcile those eyes, that voice, with the hard-reasoning, dry, mercilessway in which he laid down axioms of trade, and serenely followed themout to their full consequences? the discord jarred upon herinexpressibly. the more because of the gathering woe of which sheheard from bessy. to be sure, nicholas higgins, the father, spokedifferently. he had been appointed a committee-man, and said that heknew secrets of which the exoteric knew nothing. he said this moreexpressly and particularly, on the very day before mrs. thornton\"sdinner-party, when margaret, going in to speak to bessy, found him
　　arguing the point with boucher, the neighbour of whom she hadfrequently heard mention, as by turns exciting higgins\"s compassion, asan unskilful workman with a large family depending upon him forsupport, and at other times enraging his more energetic and sanguineneighbour by his want of what the latter called spirit. it was veryevident that higgins was in a passion when margaret entered. boucherstood, with both hands on the rather high mantel-piece, swaying himselfa little on the support which his arms, thus placed, gave him, andlooking wildly into the fire, with a kind of despair that irritated higgins,even while it went to his heart. bessy was rocking herself violentlybackwards and forwards, as was her wont (margaret knew by this time)when she was agitated, her sister mary was tying on her bonnet (ingreat clumsy bows, as suited her great clumsy fingers), to go to herfustian-cutting, blubbering out loud the while, and evidently longing tobe away from a scene that distressed her.
　　margaret came in upon this scene. she stood for a moment at the door-then,her finger on her lips, she stole to a seat on the squab near bessy.
　　nicholas saw her come in, and greeted her with a gruff, but notunfriendly nod. mary hurried out of the house catching gladly at theopen door, and crying aloud when she got away from her father\"spresence. it was only john boucher that took no notice whatever whocame in and who went out.
　　\"it\"s no use, higgins. hoo cannot live long a\" this\"n. hoo\"s just sinkingaway--not for want o\" meat hersel\"--but because hoo cannot stand th\"
  



第64章 CHAPTER XIX ANGEL VISITS (4)


　　sight o\" the little ones clemming. ay, clemming! five shilling a weekmay do well enough for thee, wi\" but two mouths to fill, and one on \"ema wench who can welly earn her own meat. but it\"s clemming to us. an\"
　　i tell thee plain--if hoo dies as i\"m \"feard hoo will afore we\"ve getten th\"
　　five per cent, i\"ll fling th\" money back i\" th\" master\"s face, and say, \"bedomned to yo\"; be domned to th\" whole cruel world o\" yo\"; that could naleave me th\" best wife that ever bore childer to a man!\" an\" look thee,lad, i\"ll hate thee, and th\" whole pack o\" th\" union. ay, an\" chase yo\"
　　through heaven wi\" my hatred,--i will, lad! i will,--if yo\"re leading meastray i\" this matter. thou saidst, nicholas, on wednesday sennight--andit\"s now tuesday i\" th\" second week--that afore a fortnight we\"d ha\" themasters coming a-begging to us to take back our\" work, at our ownwage--and time\"s nearly up,--and there\"s our lile jack lying a-bed, tooweak to cry, but just every now and then sobbing up his heart for wanto\" food,--our lile jack, i tell thee, lad! hoo\"s never looked up sin\" hewere born, and hoo loves him as if he were her very life,--as he is,--for ireckon he\"ll ha\" cost me that precious price,--our lile jack, who wakenedme each morn wi\" putting his sweet little lips to my great rough fou\"
　　face, a-seeking a smooth place to kiss,--an\" he lies clemming.\" here the
　　deep sobs choked the poor man, and nicholas looked up, with eyesbrimful of tears, to margaret, before he could gain courage to speak.
　　\"hou\"d up, man. thy lile jack shall na\" clem. i ha\" getten brass, and we\"llgo buy the chap a sup o\" milk an\" a good four-pounder this very minute.
　　what\"s mine\"s thine, sure enough, i\" thou\"st i\" want. only, dunnot loseheart, man!\" continued he, as he fumbled in a tea-pot for what money hehad. \"i lay yo\" my heart and soul we\"ll win for a\" this: it\"s but bearing onone more week, and yo just see th\" way th\" masters \"ll come round,praying on us to come back to our mills. an\" th\" union,--that\"s to say, i-willtake care yo\"ve enough for th\" childer and th\" missus. so dunnot turnfaint-heart, and go to th\" tyrants a-seeking work.\"
　　the man turned round at these words,--turned round a face so white,and gaunt, and tear-furrowed, and hopeless, that its very calm forcedmargaret to weep.
　　\"yo\" know well, that a worser tyrant than e\"er th\" masters were says\"clem to death, and see \"em a\" clem to death, ere yo\" dare go again th\"
　　union.\" yo\" know it well, nicholas, for a\" yo\"re one on \"em. yo\" may bekind hearts, each separate; but once banded together, yo\"ve no more pityfor a man than a wild hunger-maddened wolf.\"
　　nicholas had his hand on the lock of the door--he stopped and turnedround on boucher, close following:
　　\"so help me god! man alive--if i think not i\"m doing best for thee, andfor all on us. if i\"m going wrong when i think i\"m going right, it\"s theirsin, who ha\" left me where i am, in my ignorance. i ha\" thought till mybrains ached,--beli\" me, john, i have. an\" i say again, there\"s no help forus but having faith i\" th\" union. they\"ll win the day, see if they dunnot!\"
　　not one word had margaret or bessy spoken. they had hardly utteredthe sighing, that the eyes of each called to the other to bring up from thedepths of her heart. at last bessy said,\"i never thought to hear father call on god again. but yo\" heard him say,\"so help me god!\"\"
　　\"yes!\" said margaret. \"let me bring you what money i can spare,--let mebring you a little food for that poor man\"s children. don\"t let them knowit comes from any one but your father. it will be but little.\"
　　bessy lay back without taking any notice of what margaret said. shedid not cry--she only quivered up her breath,\"my heart\"s drained dry o\" tears,\" she said. \"boucher\"s been in these dayspast, a telling me of his fears and his troubles. he\"s but a weak kind o\"
　　chap, i know, but he\"s a man for a\" that; and tho\" i\"ve been angry, many atime afore now, wi\" him an\" his wife, as knew no more nor him how tomanage, yet, yo\" see, all folks isn\"t wise, yet god lets \"em live--ay, an\"
　　gives \"em some one to love, and be loved by, just as good as solomon.
　　an\", if sorrow comes to them they love, it hurts \"em as sore as e\"er it did
　　solomon. i can\"t make it out. perhaps it\"s as well such a one as boucherhas th\" union to see after him. but i\"d just like for to see th\" mean asmake th\" union, and put \"em one by one face to face wi\" boucher. ireckon, if they heard him, they\"d tell him (if i cotched \"em one by one),he might go back and get what he could for his work, even if it weren\"tso much as they ordered.\"
　　margaret sat utterly silent. how was she ever to go away into comfortand forget that man\"s voice, with the tone of unutterable agony, tellingmore by far than his words of what he had to suffer? she took out herpurse; she had not much in it of what she could call her own, but whatshe had she put into bessy\"s hand without speaking.
　　\"thank yo\". there\"s many on \"em gets no more, and is not so bad off,-leastwaysdoes not show it as he does. but father won\"t let \"em want,now he knows. yo\" see, boucher\"s been pulled down wi\" his childer,-andher being so cranky, and a\" they could pawn has gone this lasttwelvemonth. yo\"re not to think we\"d ha\" letten \"em clem, for all we\"re abit pressed oursel\"; if neighbours doesn\"t see after neighbours, i dunnowho will.\" bessy seemed almostafraid lest margaret should think theyhad not the will, and, to a certain degree, the power of helping onewhom she evidently regarded as having a claim upon them. \"besides,\"
　　she went on, \"father is sure and positive the masters must give in withinthese next few days,--that they canna hould on much longer. but i thankyo\" all the same,--i thank yo\" for mysel\", as much as for boucher, for itjust makes my heart warm to yo\" more and more.\"
　　bessy seemed much quieter to-day, but fearfully languid a exhausted.
　　as she finished speaking, she looked so faint and weary that margaretbecame alarmed.
　　\"it\"s nout,\" said bessy. \"it\"s not death yet. i had a fearfu\" night wi\" dreams-orsomewhat like dreams, for i were wide awake--and i\"m all in aswounding daze to-day,--only yon poor chap made me alive again. no!
　　it\"s not death yet, but death is not far off. ay! cover me up, and i\"ll maybe sleep, if th\" cough will let me. good night--good afternoon, m\"appeni should say--but th\" light is dim an\" misty to-day.\"
www.xiabook.com



第65章 CHAPTER XX MEN AND GENTLEMEN (1)


　　\"old and young, boy, let \"em all eat, i have it;let \"em have ten tire of teeth a-piece, i care not.\"
　　rollo, duke of normandy.
　　margaret went home so painfully occupied with what she had heard andseen that she hardly knew how to rouse herself up to the duties whichawaited her; the necessity for keeping up a constant flow of cheerfulconversation for her mother, who, now that she was unable to go out,always looked to margaret\"s return from the shortest walk as bringing insome news.
　　\"and can your factory friend come on thursday to see you dressed?\"
　　\"she was so ill i never thought of asking her,\" said margaret, dolefully.
　　\"dear! everybody is ill now, i think,\" said mrs. hale, with a little of thejealousy which one invalid is apt to feel of another. \"but it must be verysad to be ill in one of those little back streets.\" (her kindly natureprevailing, and the old helstone habits of thought returning.) \"it\"s badenough here. what could you do for her, margaret? mr. thornton hassent me some of his old port wine since you went out. would a bottle ofthat do her good, think you?\"
　　\"no, mamma! i don\"t believe they are very poor,--at least, they don\"tspeak as if they were; and, at any rate, bessy\"s illness is consumption-shewon\"t want wine. perhaps, i might take her a little preserve, made ofour dear helstone fruit. no! there\"s another family to whom i shouldlike to give--oh mamma, mamma! how am i to dress up in my finery,and go off and away to smart parties, after the sorrow i have seen today?\"
　　exclaimed margaret, bursting the bounds she had preordained forherself before she came in, and telling her mother of what she had seenand heard at higgins\"s cottage.
　　it distressed mrs. hale excessively. it made her restlessly irritated tillshe could do something. she directed margaret to pack up a basket inthe very drawing-room, to be sent there and then to the family; and wasalmost angry with her for saying, that it would not signify if it did notgo till morning, as she knew higgins had provided for their immediatewants, and she herself had left money with bessy. mrs. hale called herunfeeling for saying this; and never gave herself breathing-time till thebasket was sent out of the house. then she said:
　　\"after all, we may have been doing wrong. it was only the last time mr.
　　thornton was here that he said, those were no true friends who helpedto prolong the struggle by assisting the turn outs. and this boucher-manwas a turn-out, was he not?\"
　　the question was referred to mr. hale by his wife, when he came upstairs,fresh from giving a lesson to mr. thornton, which had ended inconversation, as was their wont. margaret did not care if their gifts hadprolonged the strike; she did not think far enough for that, in her presentexcited state.
　　mr. hale listened, and tried to be as calm as a judge; he recalled all thathad seemed so clear not half-an-hour before, as it came out of mr.
　　thornton\"s lips; and then he made an unsatisfactory compromise. hiswife and daughter had not only done quite right in this instance, but hedid not see for a moment how they could have done otherwise.
　　nevertheless, as a general rule, it was very true what mr. thornton said,that as the strike, if prolonged, must end in the masters\" bringing handsfrom a distance (if, indeed, the final result were not, as it had often beenbefore, the invention of some machine which would diminish the needof hands at all), why, it was clear enough that the kindest thing was torefuse all help which might bolster them up in their folly. but, as to thisboucher, he would go and see him the first thing in the morning, and tryand find out what could be done for him.
　　mr. hale went the next morning, as he proposed. he did not findboucher at home, but he had a long talk with his wife; promised to askfor an infirmary order for her; and, seeing the plenty provided by mrs.
　　hale, and somewhat lavishly used by the children, who were mastersdown-stairs in their father\"s absence, he came back with a moreconsoling and cheerful account than margaret had dared to hope for;indeed, what she had said the night before had prepared her father for somuch worse a state of things that, by a reaction of his imagination, hedescribed all as better than it really was.
　　\"but i will go again, and see the man himself,\" said mr. hale. \"i hardlyknow as yet how to compare one of these houses with our helstonecottages. i see furniture here which our labourers would never havethought of buying, and food commonly used which they would considerluxuries; yet for these very families there seems no other resource, nowthat their weekly wages are stopped, but the pawn-shop. one had needto learn a different language, and measure by a different standard, uphere in milton.\"
　　bessy, too, was rather better this day. still she was so weak that sheseemed to have entirely forgotten her wish to see margaret dressed--if,indeed, that had not been the feverish desire of a half-delirious state.
　　margaret could not help comparing this strange dressing of hers, to gowhere she did not care to be--her heart heavy with various anxieties-withthe old, merry, girlish toilettes that she and edith had performedscarcely more than a year ago. her only pleasure now in decking herselfout was in thinking that her mother would take delight in seeing herdressed. she blushed when dixon, throwing the drawing-room dooropen, made an appeal for admiration.
　　\"miss hale looks well, ma\"am,--doesn\"t she? mrs. shaw\"s coral couldn\"thave come in better. it just gives the right touch of colour, ma\"am.
　　otherwise, miss margaret, you would have been too pale.\"
　　margaret\"s black hair was too thick to be plaited; it needed rather to betwisted round and round, and have its fine silkiness compressed into
　　massive coils, that encircled her head like a crown, and then weregathered into a large spiral knot behind. she kept its weight together bytwo large coral pins, like small arrows for length. her white silk sleeveswere looped up with strings of the same material, and on her neck, justbelow the base of her curved and milk-white throat, there lay heavycoral beads.
　　\"oh, margaret! how i should like to be going with you to one of the oldbarrington assemblies,--taking you as lady beresford used to take me.\"
www.xiabook.com下*书 网



第66章 CHAPTER XX MEN AND GENTLEMEN (2)


　　margaret kissed her mother for this little burst of maternal vanity; butshe could hardly smile at it, she felt so much out of spirits.
　　\"i would rather stay at home with you,--much rather, mamma.\"
　　\"nonsense, darling! be sure you notice the dinner well. i shall like tohear how they manage these things in milton. particularly the secondcourse, dear. look what they have instead of game.\"
　　mrs. hale would have been more than interested,--she would have beenastonished, if she had seen the sumptuousness of the dinner-table and itsappointments. margaret, with her london cultivated taste, felt thenumber of delicacies to be oppressive one half of the quantity wouldhave been enough, and the effect lighter and more elegant. but it wasone of mrs. thornton\"s rigorous laws of hospitality, that of eachseparate dainty enough should be provided for all the guests to partake,if they felt inclined. careless to abstemiousness in her daily habits, itwas part of her pride to set a feast before such of her guests as cared forit. her son shared this feeling. he had never known--though he mighthave imagined, and had the capability to relish--any kind of society butthat which depended on an exchange of superb meals and even now,though he was denying himself the personal expenditure of anunnecessary sixpence, and had more than once regretted that theinvitations for this dinner had been sent out, still, as it was to be, he wasglad to see the old magnificence of preparation.
　　margaret and her father were the first to arrive. mr. hale was anxiouslypunctual to the time specified. there was no one up-stairs in thedrawing-room but mrs. thornton and fanny. every cover was takenoff, and the apartment blazed forth in yellow silk damask and abrilliantly-flowered carpet. every corner seemed filled up withornament, until it became a weariness to the eye, and presented astrange contrast to the bald ugliness of the look-out into the great mill-yard, where wide folding gates were thrown open for the admission ofcarriages. the mill loomed high on the left-hand side of the windows,casting a shadow down from its many stories, which darkened thesummer evening before its time.
　　\"my son was engaged up to the last moment on business. he will behere directly, mr. hale. may i beg you to take a seat?\"
　　mr. hale was standing at one of the windows as mrs. thornton spoke.
　　he turned away, saying,\"don\"t you find such close neighbourhood to the mill rather unpleasantat times?\"
　　she drew herself up:
　　\"never. i am not become so fine as to desire to forget the source of myson\"s wealth and power. besides, there is not such another factory inmilton. one room alone is two hundred and twenty square yards.\"
　　\"i meant that the smoke and the noise--the constant going out andcoming in of the work-people, might be annoying!\"
　　\"i agree with you, mr. hale!\" said fanny. \"there is a continual smell ofsteam, and oily machinery--and the noise is perfectly deafening.\"
　　\"i have heard noise that was called music far more deafening. theengine-room is at the street-end of the factory; we hardly hear it, exceptin summer weather, when all the windows are open; and as for thecontinual murmur of the work-people, it disturbs me no more than thehumming of a hive of bees. if i think of it at all, i connect it with myson, and feel how all belongs to him, and that his is the head that directsit. just now, there are no sounds to come from the mill; the hands havebeen ungrateful enough to turn out, as perhaps you have heard. but thevery business (of which i spoke, when you entered), had reference tothe steps he is going to take to make them learn their place.\" theexpression on her face, always stern, deepened into dark anger, as shesaid this. nor did it clear away when mr. thornton entered the room;for she saw, in an instant, the weight of care and anxiety which he couldnot shake off, although his guests received from him a greeting thatappeared both cheerful and cordial. he shook hands with margaret. heknew it was the first time their hands had met, though she was perfectlyunconscious of the fact. he inquired after mrs. hale, and heard mr.
　　hale\"s sanguine, hopeful account; and glancing at margaret, tounderstand how far she agreed with her father, he saw that no dissentingshadow crossed her face. and as he looked with this intention, he wasstruck anew with her great beauty. he had never seen her in such dressbefore and yet now it appeared as if such elegance of attire was sobefitting her noble figure and lofty serenity of countenance, that sheought to go always thus apparelled. she was talking to fanny; aboutwhat, he could not hear; but he saw his sister\"s restless way ofcontinually arranging some part of her gown, her wandering eyes, nowglancing here, now there, but without any purpose in her observation;and he contrasted them uneasily with the large soft eyes that lookedforth steadily at one object, as if from out their light beamed somegentle influence of repose: the curving lines of the red lips, just partedin the interest of listening to what her companion said--the head a little
　　bent forwards, so as to make a long sweeping line from the summit,where the light caught on the glossy raven hair, to the smooth ivory tipof the shoulder; the round white arms, and taper hands, laid lightlyacross each other, but perfectly motionless in their pretty attitude. mr.
　　thornton sighed as he took in all this with one of his suddencomprehensive glances. and then he turned his back to the youngladies, and threw himself, with an effort, but with all his heart and soul,into a conversation with mr. hale.
  



第67章 CHAPTER XX MEN AND GENTLEMEN (3)


　　more people came--more and more. fanny left margaret\"s side, andhelped her mother to receive her guests. mr. thornton felt that in thisinflux no one was speaking to margaret, and was restless under thisapparent neglect. but he never went near her himself; he did not look ather. only, he knew what she was doing--or not doing--better than heknew the movements of any one else in the room. margaret was sounconscious of herself, and so much amused by watching other people,that she never thought whether she was left unnoticed or not. somebodytook her down to dinner; she did not catch the name; nor did he seemmuch inclined to talk to her. there was a very animated conversationgoing on among the gentlemen; the ladies, for the most part, weresilent, employing themselves in taking notes of the dinner andcriticising each other\"s dresses. margaret caught the clue to the generalconversation, grew interested and listened attentively. mr. horsfall, thestranger, whose visit to the town was the original germ of the party, wasasking questions relative to the trade and manufactures of the place; andthe rest of the gentlemen--all milton men,--were giving him answersand explanations. some dispute arose, which was warmly contested; itwas referred to mr. thornton, who had hardly spoken before; but whonow gave an opinion, the grounds of which were so clearly stated thateven the opponents yielded. margaret\"s attention was thus called to herhost; his whole manner as master of the house, and entertainer of hisfriends, was so straightforward, yet simple and modest, as to bethoroughly dignified. margaret thought she had never seen him to somuch advantage. when he had come to their house, there had beenalways something, either of over-eagerness or of that kind of vexedannoyance which seemed ready to pre-suppose that he was unjustlyjudged, and yet felt too proud to try and make himself betterunderstood. but now, among his fellows, there was no uncertainty as tohis position. he was regarded by them as a man of great force ofcharacter; of power in many ways. there was no need to struggle fortheir respect. he had it, and he knew it; and the security of this gave afine grand quietness to his voice and ways, which margaret had missedbefore.
　　he was not in the habit of talking to ladies; and what he did say was a
　　little formal. to margaret herself he hardly spoke at all. she wassurprised to think how much she enjoyed this dinner. she knew enoughnow to understand many local interests--nay, even some of the technicalwords employed by the eager mill-owners. she silently took a verydecided part in the question they were discussing. at any rate, theytalked in desperate earnest,--not in the used-up style that wearied her soin the old london parties. she wondered that with all this dwelling onthe manufactures and trade of the place, no allusion was made to thestrike then pending. she did not yet know how coolly such things weretaken by the masters, as having only one possible end. to be sure, themen were cutting their own throats, as they had done many a timebefore; but if they would be fools, and put themselves into the hands ofa rascally set of paid delegates,\" they must take the consequence. one ortwo thought thornton looked out of spirits; and, of course, he must loseby this turn-out. but it was an accident that might happen to themselvesany day; and thornton was as good to manage a strike as any one; forhe was as iron a chap as any in milton. the hands had mistaken theirman in trying that dodge on him. and they chuckled inwardly at theidea of the workmen\"s discomfiture and defeat, in their attempt to alterone iota of what thornton had decreed.
下 ?^书? 网



第68章 CHAPTER XX MEN AND GENTLEMEN (4)


　　it was rather dull for margaret after dinner. she was glad when thegentlemen came, not merely because she caught her father\"s eye tobrighten her sleepiness up; but because she could listen to somethinglarger and grander than the petty interests which the ladies had beentalking about. she liked the exultation in the sense of power whichthese milton men had. it might be rather rampant in its display, andsavour of boasting; but still they seemed to defy the old limits ofpossibility, in a kind of fine intoxication, caused by the recollection ofwhat had been achieved, and what yet should be. if in her coolermoments she might not approve of their spirit in all things, still therewas much to admire in their forgetfulness of themselves and thepresent, in their anticipated triumphs over all inanimate matter at somefuture time which none of them should live to see. she was ratherstartled when mr. thornton spoke to her, close at her elbow:
　　\"i could see you were on our side in our discussion at dinner,--were younot, miss hale?\"
　　\"certainly. but then i know so little about it. i was surprised, however,to find from what mr. horsfall said, that there were others who thoughtin so diametrically opposite a manner, as the mr. morison he spokeabout. he cannot be a gentleman--is he?\"
　　\"i am not quite the person to decide on another\"s gentlemanliness, misshale. i mean, i don\"t quite understand your application of the word. buti should say that this morison is no true man. i don\"t know who he is; i
　　merely judge him from mr. horsfall\"s account.\"
　　\"i suspect my \"gentleman\" includes your \"true man.\"\"
　　\"and a great deal more, you would imply. i differ from you. a man is tome a higher and a completer being than a gentleman.\"
　　\"what do you mean?\" asked margaret. \"we must understand the wordsdifferently.\"
　　\"i take it that \"gentleman\" is a term that only describes a person in hisrelation to others; but when we speak of him as \"a man,\" we considerhim not merely with regard to his fellow-men, but in relation to himself,-to life--to time--to eternity. a cast-away lonely as robinson crusoe--aprisoner immured in a dungeon for life--nay, even a saint in patmos, hashis endurance, his strength, his faith, best described by being spoken ofas \"a man.\" i am rather weary of this word \"gentlemanly,\" which seemsto me to be often inappropriately used, and often, too, with suchexaggerated distortion of meaning, while the full simplicity of the noun\"man,\" and the adjective \"manly\" are unacknowledged--that i aminduced to class it with the cant of the day.\"
　　margaret thought a moment,--but before she could speak her slowconviction, he was called away by some of the eager manufacturers,whose speeches she could not hear, though she could guess at theirimport by the short clear answers mr. thornton gave, which camesteady and firm as the boom of a distant minute gun. they wereevidently talking of the turn-out, and suggesting what course had bestbe pursued. she heard mr. thornton say:
　　\"that has been done.\" then came a hurried murmur, in which two orthree joined.
　　\"all those arrangements have been made.\"
　　some doubts were implied, some difficulties named by mr. slickson,who took hold of mr. thornton\"s arm, the better to impress his words.
　　mr. thornton moved slightly away, lifted his eyebrows a very little, andthen replied:
　　\"i take the risk. you need not join in it unless you choose.\" still somemore fears were urged.
　　\"i\"m not afraid of anything so dastardly as incendiarism. we are openenemies; and i can protect myself from any violence that i apprehend.
　　and i will assuredly protect all others who come to me for work. theyknow my determination by this time, as well and as fully as you do.\"
　　mr. horsfall took him a little on one side, as margaret conjectured, toask him some other question about the strike; but, in truth, it was toinquire who she herself was--so quiet, so stately, and so beautiful.
　　\"a milton lady?\" asked he, as the name was given.
　　\"no! from the south of england--hampshire, i believe,\" was the cold,indifferent answer.
　　mrs. slickson was catechising fanny on the same subject.
　　\"who is that fine distinguished-looking girl? a sister of mr. horsfall\"s?\"
　　\"oh dear, no! that is mr. hale, her father, talking now to mr. stephens.
　　he gives lessons; that is to say, he reads with young men. my brotherjohn goes to him twice a week, and so he begged mamma to ask themhere, in hopes of getting him known. i believe, we have some of theirprospectuses, if you would like to have one.\"
　　\"mr. thornton! does he really find time to read with a tutor, in the midstof all his business,--and this abominable strike in hand as well?\"
　　fanny was not sure, from mrs. slickson\"s manner, whether she ought tobe proud or ashamed of her brother\"s conduct; and, like all people whotry and take other people\"s \"ought\" for the rule of their feelings, she wasinclined to blush for any singularity of action. her shame wasinterrupted by the dispersion of the guests.
www.xiabook.com   http://www.xiaboＯk.com



第69章 CHAPTER XXI THE DARK NIGHT (1)


　　\"on earth is known to nonethe smile that is not sister to a tear.\"
　　elliott.
　　margaret and her father walked home. the night was fine, the streetsclean, and with her pretty white silk, like leezie lindsay\"s gown o\"
　　green satin, in the ballad, \"kilted up to her knee,\" she was off with herfather--ready to dance along with the excitement of the cool, fresh nightair.
　　\"i rather think thornton is not quite easy in his mind about this strike.
　　he seemed very anxious to-night.\"
　　\"i should wonder if he were not. but he spoke with his usual coolness tothe others, when they suggested different things, just before we cameaway.\"
　　\"so he did after dinner as well. it would take a good deal to stir himfrom his cool manner of speaking; but his face strikes me as anxious.\"
　　\"i should be, if i were he. he must know of the growing anger andhardly smothered hatred of his workpeople, who all look upon him aswhat the bible calls a \"hard man,\"--not so much unjust as unfeeling;clear in judgment, standing upon his \"rights\" as no human being oughtto stand, considering what we and all our petty rights are in the sight ofthe almighty. i am glad you think he looks anxious. when i remember
　　boucher\"s half mad words and ways, i cannot bear to think how coollymr. thornton spoke.\"
　　\"in the first place, i am not so convinced as you are about that manboucher\"s utter distress; for the moment, he was badly off, i don\"t doubt.
　　but there is always a mysterious supply of money from these unions;and, from what you said, it was evident the man was of a passionate,demonstrative nature, and gave strong expression to all he felt.\"
　　\"oh, papa!\"
　　\"well! i only want you to do justice to mr. thornton, who is, i suspect,of an exactly opposite nature,--a man who is far too proud to show hisfeelings. just the character i should have thought beforehand, youwould have admired, margaret.\"
　　\"so i do,--so i should; but i don\"t feel quite so sure as you do of theexistence of those feelings. he is a man of great strength of character,-ofunusual intellect, considering the few advantages he has had.\"
　　\"not so few. he has led a practical life from a very early age; has beencalled upon to exercise judgment and self-control. all that developesone part of the intellect. to be sure, he needs some of the knowledge ofthe past, which gives the truest basis for conjecture as to the future; buthe knows this need,--he perceives it, and that is something. you arequite prejudiced against mr. thornton, margaret.\"
　　\"he is the first specimen of a manufacturer--of a person engaged in trade-that i had ever the opportunity of studying, papa. he is my first olive:
　　let me make a face while i swallow it. i know he is good of his kind,and by and by i shall like the kind. i rather think i am already beginningto do so. i was very much interested by what the gentlemen weretalking about, although i did not understand half of it. i was quite sorrywhen miss thornton came to take me to the other end of the room,saying she was sure i should be uncomfortable at being the only ladyamong so many gentlemen. i had never thought about it, i was so busylistening; and the ladies were so dull, papa--oh, so dull! yet i think itwas clever too. it reminded me of our old game of having each so manynouns to introduce into a sentence.\"
　　\"what do you mean, child?\" asked mr. hale.
　　\"why, they took nouns that were signs of things which gave evidence ofwealth,--housekeepers, under-gardeners, extent of glass, valuable lace,diamonds, and all such things; and each one formed her speech so as tobring them all in, in the prettiest accidental manner possible.\"
　　\"you will be as proud of your one servant when you get her, if all is trueabout her that mrs. thornton says.\"
　　\"to be sure, i shall. i felt like a great hypocrite to-night, sitting there inmy white silk gown, with my idle hands before me, when i rememberedall the good, thorough, house-work they had done to-day. they took me
　　for a fine lady, i\"m sure.\"
　　\"even i was mistaken enough to think you looked like a lady my dear,\"
　　said mr. hale, quietly smiling.
　　but smiles were changed to white and trembling looks, when they sawdixon\"s face, as she opened the door.
　　\"oh, master!--oh, miss margaret! thank god you are come! dr.
　　donaldson is here. the servant next door went for him, for thecharwoman is gone home. she\"s better now; but, oh, sir! i thought she\"dhave died an hour ago.\"
　　mr. hale caught margaret\"s arm to steady himself from falling. helooked at her face, and saw an expression upon it of surprise andextremest sorrow, but not the agony of terror that contracted his ownunprepared heart. she knew more than he did, and yet she listened withthat hopeless expression of awed apprehension.
　　\"oh! i should not have left her--wicked daughter that i am!\" moanedforth margaret, as she supported her trembling father\"s hasty steps upstairs.
　　dr. donaldson met them on the landing.
　　\"she is better now,\" he whispered. \"the opiate has taken effect. thespasms were very bad: no wonder they frightened your maid; but she\"llrally this time.\"
　　\"this time! let me go to her!\" half an hour ago, mr. hale was a middle-aged man; now his sight was dim, his senses wavering, his walktottering, as if he were seventy years of age.
　　dr. donaldson took his arm, and led him into the bedroom. margaretfollowed close. there lay her mother, with an unmistakable look on herface. she might be better now; she was sleeping, but death had signedher for his own, and it was clear that ere long he would return to takepossession. mr. hale looked at her for some time without a word. thenhe began to shake all over, and, turning away from dr. donaldson\"sanxious care, he groped to find the door; he could not see it, althoughseveral candles, brought in the sudden affright, were burning and flaringthere. he staggered into the drawing-room, and felt about for a chair.
　　dr. donaldson wheeled one to him, and placed him in it. he felt hispulse.
　　\"speak to him, miss hale. we must rouse him.\"
　　\"papa!\" said margaret, with a crying voice that was wild with pain.
　　\"papa! speak to me!\" the speculation came again into his eyes, and hemade a great effort.
　　\"margaret, did you know of this? oh, it was cruel of you!\"
　　\"no, sir, it was not cruel!\" replied dr. donaldson, with quick decision.




第70章 CHAPTER XXI THE DARK NIGHT (2)


　　\"miss hale acted under my directions. there may have been a mistake,but it was not cruel. your wife will be a different creature to-morrow, itrust. she has had spasms, as i anticipated, though i did not tell miss
　　hale of my apprehensions. she has taken the opiate i brought with me;she will have a good long sleep; and to-morrow, that look which hasalarmed you so much will have passed away.\"
　　\"but not the disease?\"
　　dr. donaldson glanced at margaret. her bent head, her face raised withno appeal for a temporary reprieve, showed that quick observer ofhuman nature that she thought it better that the whole truth should betold.
　　\"not the disease. we cannot touch the disease, with all our poor vauntedskill. we can only delay its progress--alleviate the pain it causes. be aman, sir--a christian. have faith in the immortality of the soul, whichno pain, no mortal disease, can assail or touch!\"
　　but all the reply he got, was in the choked words, \"you have never beenmarried, dr. donaldson; you do not know what it is,\" and in the deep,manly sobs, which went through the stillness of the night like heavypulses of agony.
　　margaret knelt by him, caressing him with tearful caresses. no one, noteven dr. donaldson, knew how the time went by. mr. hale was the firstto dare to speak of the necessities of the present moment.
　　\"what must we do?\" asked he. \"tell us both. margaret is my staff--myright hand.\"
　　dr. donaldson gave his clear, sensible directions. no fear for to-night-nay,even peace for to-morrow, and for many days yet. but no enduringhope of recovery. he advised mr. hale to go to bed, and leave only oneto watch the slumber, which he hoped would be undisturbed. hepromised to come again early in the morning. and with a warm andkindly shake of the hand, he left them.
　　they spoke but few words; they were too much exhausted by theirterror to do more than decide upon the immediate course of action. mr.
　　hale was resolved to sit up through the night, and all that margaretcould do was to prevail upon him to rest on the drawing-room sofa.
　　dixon stoutly and bluntly refused to go to bed; and, as for margaret, itwas simply impossible that she should leave her mother, let all thedoctors in the world speak of \"husbanding resources,\" and \"one watcheronly being required.\" so, dixon sat, and stared, and winked, anddrooped, and picked herself up again with a jerk, and finally gave upthe battle, and fairly snored. margaret had taken off her gown andtossed it aside with a sort of impatient disgust, and put on her dressing-gown. she felt as if she never could sleep again; as if her whole senseswere acutely vital, and all endued with double keenness, for thepurposes of watching. every sight and sound--nay, even every thought,touched some nerve to the very quick. for more than two hours, sheheard her father\"s restless movements in the next room. he came
　　perpetually to the door of her mother\"s chamber, pausing there to listen,till she, not hearing his close unseen presence, went and opened it to tellhim how all went on, in reply to the questions his baked lips couldhardly form. at last he, too, fell asleep, and all the house was still.
　　margaret sate behind the curtain thinking. far away in time, far away inspace, seemed all the interests of past days. not more than thirty-sixhours ago, she cared for bessy higgins and her father, and her heart waswrung for boucher; now, that was all like a dreaming memory of someformer life;--everything that had passed out of doors seemed disseveredfrom her mother, and therefore unreal. even harley street appearedmore distinct; there she remembered, as if it were yesterday, how shehad pleased herself with tracing out her mother\"s features in her auntshaw\"s face,--and how letters had come, making her dwell on thethoughts of home with all the longing of love. helstone, itself, was inthe dim past. the dull gray days of the preceding winter and spring, souneventless and monotonous, seemed more associated with what shecared for now above all price. she would fain have caught at the skirtsof that departing time, and prayed it to return, and give her back whatshe had too little valued while it was yet in her possession. what a vainshow life seemed! how unsubstantial, and flickering, and flitting! itwas as if from some aerial belfry, high up above the stir and jar of theearth, there was a bell continually tolling, \"all are shadows!--all arepassing!--all is past!\" and when the morning dawned, cool and gray,like many a happier morning before--when margaret looked one by oneat the sleepers, it seemed as if the terrible night were unreal as a dream;it, too, was a shadow. it, too, was past.
www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ



第71章 CHAPTER XXI THE DARK NIGHT (3)


　　mrs. hale herself was not aware when she awoke, how ill she had beenthe night before. she was rather surprised at dr. donaldson\"s early visit,and perplexed by the anxious faces of husband and child. she consentedto remain in bed that day, saying she certainly was tired; but, the next,she insisted on getting up; and dr. donaldson gave his consent to herreturning into the drawing-room. she was restless and uncomfortable inevery position, and before night she became very feverish. mr. halewas utterly listless, and incapable of deciding on anything.
　　\"what can we do to spare mamma such another night?\" asked margareton the third day.
　　\"it is, to a certain degree, the reaction after the powerful opiates i havebeen obliged to use. it is more painful for you to see than for her tobear, i believe. but, i think, if we could get a water-bed it might be agood thing. not but what she will be better to-morrow; pretty much likeherself as she was before this attack. still, i should like her to have awater-bed. mrs. thornton has one, i know. i\"ll try and call there thisafternoon. stay,\" said he, his eye catching on margaret\"s face, blanched
　　with watching in a sick room, \"i\"m not sure whether i can go; i\"ve a longround to take. it would do you no harm to have a brisk walk tomarlborough street, and ask mrs. thornton if she can spare it.\"
　　\"certainly,\" said margaret. \"i could go while mamma is asleep thisafternoon. i\"m sure mrs. thornton would lend it to us.\"
　　dr. donaldson\"s experience told them rightly. mrs. hale seemed toshake off the consequences of her attack, and looked brighter and betterthis afternoon than margaret had ever hoped to see her again. herdaughter left her after dinner, sitting in her easy chair, with her handlying in her husband\"s, who looked more worn and suffering than she byfar. still, he could smile now-rather slowly, rather faintly, it is true; buta day or two before, margaret never thought to see him smile again.
　　it was about two miles from their house in crampton crescent tomarlborough street. it was too hot to walk very quickly. an august sunbeat straight down into the street at three o\"clock in the afternoon.
　　margaret went along, without noticing anything very different fromusual in the first mile and a half of her journey; she was absorbed in herown thoughts, and had learnt by this time to thread her way through theirregular stream of human beings that flowed through milton streets.
　　but, by and by, she was struck with an unusual heaving among the massof people in the crowded road on which she was entering. they did notappear to be moving on, so much as talking, and listening, and buzzingwith excitement, without much stirring from the spot where they mighthappen to be. still, as they made way for her, and, wrapt up in thepurpose of her errand, and the necessities that suggested it, she was lessquick of observation than she might have been, if her mind had been atease, she had got into marlborough street before the full convictionforced itself upon her, that there was a restless, oppressive sense ofirritation abroad among the people; a thunderous atmosphere, morallyas well as physically, around her. from every narrow lane opening outon marlborough street came up a low distant roar, as of myriads offierce indignant voices. the inhabitants of each poor squalid dwellingwere gathered round the doors and windows, if indeed they were notactually standing in the middle of the narrow ways--all with looks intenttowards one point. marlborough street itself was the focus of all thosehuman eyes, that betrayed intensest interest of various kinds; somefierce with anger, some lowering with relentless threats, some dilatedwith fear, or imploring entreaty; and, as margaret reached the small side-entrance by the folding doors, in the great dead wall of marlboroughmill-yard and waited the porter\"s answer to the bell, she looked roundand heard the first long far-off roll of the tempest;--saw the first slow-surging wave of the dark crowd come, with its threatening crest, tumbleover, and retreat, at the far end of the street, which a moment ago,
　　seemed so full of repressed noise, but which now was ominously still;all these circumstances forced themselves on margaret\"s notice, but didnot sink down into her pre-occupied heart. she did not know what theymeant--what was their deep significance; while she did know, did feelthe keen sharp pressure of the knife that was soon to stab her throughand through by leaving her motherless. she was trying to realise that, inorder that, when it came, she might be ready to comfort her father.
　　the porter opened the door cautiously, not nearly wide enough to admither.
　　\"it\"s you, is it, ma\"am?\" said he, drawing a long breath, and widening theentrance, but still not opening it fully. margaret went in. he hastilybolted it behind her.
　　\"th\" folk are all coming up here i reckon?\" asked he.
　　\"i don\"t know. something unusual seemed going on; but this street isquite empty, i think.\"
　　she went across the yard and up the steps to the house door. there wasno near sound,--no steam-engine at work with beat and pant,--no clickof machinery, or mingling and clashing of many sharp voices; but faraway, the ominous gathering roar, deep-clamouring.
/



第72章 CHAPTER XXII A BLOW AND ITS CONSEQUENCES (1)


　　\"but work grew scarce, while bread grew dear,and wages lessened, too;for irish hordes were bidders here,our half-paid work to do.\"
　　corn law rhymes.
　　margaret was shown into the drawing-room. it had returned into itsnormal state of bag and covering. the windows were half open becauseof the heat, and the venetian blinds covered the glass,--so that a graygrim light, reflected from the pavement below, threw all the shadowswrong, and combined with the green-tinged upper light to make evenmargaret\"s own face, as she caught it in the mirrors, look ghastly andwan. she sat and waited; no one came. every now and then, the windseemed to bear the distant multitudinous sound nearer; and yet therewas no wind! it died away into profound stillness between whiles.
　　fanny came in at last.
　　\"mamma will come directly, miss hale. she desired me to apologise toyou as it is. perhaps you know my brother has imported hands fromireland, and it has irritated the milton people excessively--as if hehadn\"t a right to get labour where he could; and the stupid wretches herewouldn\"t work for him; and now they\"ve frightened these poor irishstarvelings so with their threats, that we daren\"t let them out. you maysee them huddled in that top room in the mill,--and they\"re to sleepthere, to keep them safe from those brutes, who will neither work norlet them work. and mamma is seeing about their food, and john isspeaking to them, for some of the women are crying to go back. ah!
　　here\"s mamma!\"
　　mrs. thornton came in with a look of black sternness on her face,which made margaret feel she had arrived at a bad time to trouble herwith her request. however, it was only in compliance with mrs.
　　thornton\"s expressed desire, that she would ask for whatever they mightwant in the progress of her mother\"s illness. mrs. thornton\"s browcontracted, and her mouth grew set, while margaret spoke with gentlemodesty of her mother\"s restlessness, and dr. donaldson\"s wish that sheshould have the relief of a water-bed. she ceased. mrs. thornton didnot reply immediately. then she started up and exclaimed-\"
　　they\"re at the gates! call john, fanny,--call him in from the mill!
　　they\"re at the gates! they\"ll batter them in! call john, i say!\"
　　and simultaneously, the gathering tramp--to which she had beenlistening, instead of heeding margaret\"s words--was heard just rightoutside the wall, and an increasing din of angry voices raged behind thewooden barrier, which shook as if the unseen maddened crowd madebattering-rams of their bodies, and retreated a short space only to comewith more united steady impetus against it, till their great beats madethe strong gates quiver, like reeds before the wind.
　　the women gathered round the windows, fascinated to look on thescene which terrified them. mrs. thornton, the women-servants,margaret,--all were there. fanny had returned, screaming up-stairs as ifpursued at every step, and had thrown herself in hysterical sobbing onthe sofa. mrs. thornton watched for her son, who was still in the mill.
　　he came out, looked up at them--the pale cluster of faces--and smiledgood courage to them, before he locked the factory-door. then he calledto one of the women to come down and undo his own door, whichfanny had fastened behind her in her mad flight. mrs. thornton herselfwent. and the sound of his well-known and commanding voice, seemedto have been like the taste of blood to the infuriated multitude outside.
　　hitherto they had been voiceless, wordless, needing all their breath fortheir hard-labouring efforts to break down the gates. but now, hearing
　　him speak inside, they set up such a fierce unearthly groan, that evenmrs. thornton was white with fear as she preceded him into the room.
　　he came in a little flushed, but his eyes gleaming, as in answer to thetrumpet-call of danger, and with a proud look of defiance on his face,that made him a noble, if not a handsome man. margaret had alwaysdreaded lest her courage should fail her in any emergency, and sheshould be proved to be, what she dreaded lest she was--a coward. butnow, in this real great time of reasonable fear and nearness of terror, sheforgot herself, and felt only an intense sympathy--intense to painfulness-in the interests of the moment.
　　mr. thornton came frankly forwards:
　　\"i\"m sorry, miss hale, you have visited us at this unfortunate moment,when, i fear, you may be involved in whatever risk we have to bear.
　　mother! hadn\"t you better go into the back rooms? i\"m not sure whetherthey may not have made their way from pinner\"s lane into the stable-yard; but if not, you will be safer there than here. go jane!\" continuedhe, addressing the upper-servant. and she went, followed by the others.
　　\"i stop here!\" said his mother. \"where you are, there i stay.\" and indeed,retreat into the back rooms was of no avail; the crowd had surroundedthe outbuildings at the rear, and were sending forth their: awfulthreatening roar behind. the servants retreated into the garrets, withmany a cry and shriek. mr. thornton smiled scornfully as he heardthem. he glanced at margaret, standing all by herself at the windownearest the factory. her eyes glittered, her colour was deepened oncheek and lip. as if she felt his look, she turned to him and asked aquestion that had been for some time in her mind:
　　\"where are the poor imported work-people? in the factory there?\"
　　\"yes! i left them cowered up in a small room, at the head of a backflight of stairs; bidding them run all risks, and escape down there, ifthey heard any attack made on the mill-doors. but it is not them--it isme they want.\"
　　\"when can the soldiers be here?\" asked his mother, in a low but notunsteady voice.
　　he took out his watch with the same measured composure with whichhe did everything. he made some little calculation:
　　\"supposing williams got straight off when i told him, and hadn\"t tododge about amongst them--it must be twenty minutes yet.\"
　　\"twenty minutes!\" said his mother, for the first time showing her terrorin the tones of her voice.
　　\"shut down the windows instantly, mother,\" exclaimed he: \"the gateswon\"t bear such another shock. shut down that window, miss hale.\"
　　margaret shut down her window, and then went to assist mrs.
　　thornton\"s trembling fingers.
www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ下 /书 网



第73章 CHAPTER XXII A BLOW AND ITS CONSEQUENCES (2)


　　from some cause or other, there was a pause of several minutes in theunseen street. mrs. thornton looked with wild anxiety at her son\"scountenance, as if to gain the interpretation of the sudden stillness fromhim. his face was set into rigid lines of contemptuous defiance; neitherhope nor fear could be read there.
　　fanny raised herself up:
　　\"are they gone?\" asked she, in a whisper.
　　\"gone!\" replied he. \"listen!\"
　　she did listen; they all could hear the one great straining breath; thecreak of wood slowly yielding; the wrench of iron; the mighty fall ofthe ponderous gates. fanny stood up tottering--made a step or twotowards her mother, and fell forwards into her arms in a fainting fit.
　　mrs. thornton lifted her up with a strength that was as much that of thewill as of the body, and carried her away.
　　\"thank god!\" said mr. thornton, as he watched her out. \"had you notbetter go upstairs, miss hale?\"
　　margaret\"s lips formed a \"no!\"--but he could not hear her speak, for thetramp of innumerable steps right under the very wall of the house, andthe fierce growl of low deep angry voices that had a ferocious murmurof satisfaction in them, more dreadful than their baffled cries not manyminutes before.
　　\"never mind!\" said he, thinking to encourage her. \"i am very sorry youshould have been entrapped into all this alarm; but it cannot last longnow; a few minutes more, and the soldiers will be here.\"
　　\"oh, god!\" cried margaret, suddenly; \"there is boucher. i know his face,though he is livid with rage,--he is fighting to get to the front--look!
　　look!\"
　　\"who is boucher?\" asked mr. thornton, coolly, and coming close to thewindow to discover the man in whom margaret took such an interest.
　　as soon as they saw mr. thornton, they set up a yell,--to call it nothuman is nothing,--it was as the demoniac desire of some terrible wildbeast for the food that is withheld from his ravening. even he drew hackfor a moment, dismayed at the intensity of hatred he had provoked.
　　\"let them yell!\" said he. \"in five minutes more--. i only hope my pooririshmen are not terrified out of their wits by such a fiendlike noise.
　　keep up your courage for five minutes, miss hale.\"
　　\"don\"t be afraid for me,\" she said hastily. \"but what in five minutes? canyou do nothing to soothe these poor creatures? it is awful to see them.\"
　　\"the soldiers will be here directly, and that will bring them to reason.\"
　　\"to reason!\" said margaret, quickly. \"what kind of reason?\"
　　\"the only reason that does with men that make themselves into wildbeasts. by heaven! they\"ve turned to the mill-door!\"
　　\"mr. thornton,\" said margaret, shaking all over with her passion, \"go
　　down this instant, if you are not a coward. go down and face them likea man. save these poor strangers, whom you have decoyed here. speakto your workmen as if they were human beings. speak to them kindly.
　　don\"t let the soldiers come in and cut down poor-creatures who aredriven mad. i see one there who is. if you have any courage or noblequality in you, go out and speak to them, man to man.\"
　　he turned and looked at her while she spoke. a dark cloud came overhis face while he listened. he set his teeth as he heard her words.
　　\"i will go. perhaps i may ask you to accompany me downstairs, and barthe door behind me; my mother and sister will need that protection.\"
　　\"oh! mr. thornton! i do not know--i may be wrong--only--\"
　　but he was gone; he was downstairs in the hall; he had unbarred thefront door; all she could do, was to follow him quickly, and fasten itbehind him, and clamber up the stairs again with a sick heart and adizzy head. again she took her place by the farthest window. he was onthe steps below; she saw that by the direction of a thousand angry eyes;but she could neither see nor hear any-thing save the savage satisfactionof the rolling angry murmur. she threw the window wide open. many inthe crowd were mere boys; cruel and thoughtless,--cruel because theywere thoughtless; some were men, gaunt as wolves, and mad for prey.
　　she knew how it was; they were like boucher, with starving children athome--relying on ultimate success in their efforts to get higher wages,and enraged beyond measure at discovering that irishmen were to bebrought in to rob their little ones of bread. margaret knew it all; sheread it in boucher\"s face, forlornly desperate and livid with rage. if mr.
　　thornton would but say something to them--let them hear his voiceonly--it seemed as if it would be better than this wild beating and ragingagainst the stony silence that vouchsafed them. no word, even of angeror reproach. but perhaps he was speaking now; there was a momentaryhush of their noise, inarticulate as that of a troop of animals. she toreher bonnet off; and bent forwards to hear. she could only see; for if mr.
　　thornton had indeed made the attempt to speak, the momentary instinctto listen to him was past and gone, and the people were raging worsethan ever. he stood with his arms folded; still as a statue; his face palewith repressed excitement. they were trying to intimidate him--to makehim flinch; each was urging the other on to some immediate act ofpersonal violence. margaret felt intuitively, that in an instant all wouldbe uproar; the first touch would cause an explosion, in which, amongsuch hundreds of infuriated men and reckless boys, even mr. thornton\"slife would be unsafe,--that in another instant the stormy passions wouldhave passed their bounds, and swept away all barriers of reason, orapprehension of consequence. even while she looked, she saw lads inthe back-ground stooping to take off their heavy wooden clogs--the
　　readiest missile they could find; she saw it was the spark to thegunpowder, and, with a cry, which no one heard, she rushed out of theroom, down stairs,--she had lifted the great iron bar of the door with animperious force--had thrown the door open wide--and was there, in faceof that angry sea of men, her eyes smiting them with flaming arrows ofreproach. the clogs were arrested in the hands that held them--thecountenances, so fell not a moment before, now looked irresolute, andas if asking what this meant. for she stood between them and theirenemy. she could not speak, but held out her arms towards them till shecould recover breath.
www.56ｗen．ＣＯＭ/



第74章 CHAPTER XXII A BLOW AND ITS CONSEQUENCES (3)


　　\"oh, do not use violence! he is one man, and you are many; but herwords died away, for there was no tone in her voice; it was but a hoarsewhisper. mr. thornton stood a little on one side; he had moved awayfrom behind her, as if jealous of anything that should come betweenhim and danger.
　　\"go!\" said she, once more (and now her voice was like a cry). \"thesoldiers are sent for--are coming. go peaceably. go away. you shallhave relief from your complaints, whatever they are.\"
　　\"shall them irish blackguards be packed back again?\" asked one fromout the crowd, with fierce threatening in his voice.
　　\"never, for your bidding!\" exclaimed mr. thornton. and instantly thestorm broke. the hootings rose and filled the air,--but margaret did nothear them. her eye was on the group of lads who had armed themselveswith their clogs some time before. she saw their gesture--she knew itsmeaning,--she read their aim. another moment, and mr. thorntonmight be smitten down,--he whom she had urged and goaded to come tothis perilous place. she only thought how she could save him. shethrew her arms around him; she made her body into a shield from thefierce people beyond. still, with his arms folded, he shook her off.
　　\"go away,\" said he, in his deep voice. \"this is no place for you.\"
　　\"it is!\" said she. \"you did not see what i saw.\" if she thought her sexwould be a protection,--if, with shrinking eyes she had turned awayfrom the terrible anger of these men, in any hope that ere she lookedagain they would have paused and reflected, and slunk away, andvanished,--she was wrong. their reckless passion had carried them toofar to stop--at least had carried some of them too far; for it is always thesavage lads, with their love of cruel excitement, who head the riot-recklessto what bloodshed it may lead. a clog whizzed through the air.
　　margaret\"s fascinated eyes watched its progress; it missed its aim, andshe turned sick with affright, but changed not her position, only hid herface on mr. thornton s arm. then she turned and spoke again:\"
　　\"for god\"s sake! do not damage your cause by this violence. you do notknow what you are doing.\" she strove to make her words distinct.
　　a sharp pebble flew by her, grazing forehead and cheek, and drawing ablinding sheet of light before her eyes. she lay like one dead on mr.
　　thornton\"s shoulder. then he unfolded his arms, and held her encircledin one for an instant:
　　\"you do well!\" said he. \"you come to oust the innocent stranger you fall-you hundreds--on one man; and when a woman comes before you, toask you for your own sakes to be reasonable creatures, your cowardlywrath falls upon her! you do well!\" they were silent while he spoke.
　　they were watching, open-eyed and open-mouthed, the thread of dark-red blood which wakened them up from their trance of passion. thosenearest the gate stole out ashamed; there was a movement through allthe crowd--a retreating movement. only one voice cried out:
　　\"th\" stone were meant for thee; but thou wert sheltered behind awoman!\"
　　mr. thornton quivered with rage. the blood-flowing had mademargaret conscious--dimly, vaguely conscious. he placed her gently onthe door-step, her head leaning against the frame.
　　\"can you rest there?\" he asked. but without waiting for her answer, hewent slowly down the steps right into the middle of the crowd. \"nowkill me, if it is your brutal will. there is no woman to shield me here.
　　you may beat me to death--you will never move me from what i havedetermined upon--not you!\" he stood amongst them, with his armsfolded, in precisely the same attitude as he had been in on the steps.
　　but the retrograde movement towards the gate had begun--asunreasoningly, perhaps as blindly, as the simultaneous anger. or,perhaps, the idea of the approach of the soldiers, and the sight of thatpale, upturned face, with closed eyes, still and sad as marble, though thetears welled out of the long entanglement of eyelashes and droppeddown; and, heavier, slower plash than even tears, came the drip ofblood from her wound. even the most desperate--boucher himself-drewback, faltered away, scowled, and finally went off, mutteringcurses on the master, who stood in his unchanging attitude, lookingafter their retreat with defiant eyes. the moment that retreat hadchanged into a flight (as it was sure from its very character to do), hedarted up the steps to margaret.
　　she tried to rise without his help.
　　\"it is nothing,\" she said, with a sickly smile. \"the skin is grazed, and iwas stunned at the moment. oh, i am so thankful they are gone!\" andshe cried without restraint.
　　he could not sympathise with her. his anger had not abated; it wasrather rising the more as his sense of immediate danger was passingaway. the distant clank of the soldiers was heard just five minutes toolate to make this vanished mob feel the power of authority and order.
　　he hoped they would see the troops, and be quelled by the thought oftheir narrow escape. while these thoughts crossed his mind, margaretclung to the doorpost to steady herself:but a film came over her eyes-hewas only just in time to catch her. \"mother--mother!\" cried he; \"comedown--they are gone, and miss hale is hurt!\" he bore her into the dining-room, and laid her on the sofa there; laid her down softly, and lookingon her pure white face, the sense of what she was to him came uponhim so keenly that he spoke it out in his pain:
　　\"oh, my margaret--my margaret! no one can tell what you are to me!
　　dead--cold as you lie there, you are the only woman i ever loved! oh,margaret--margaret!\"
　　inarticulately as he spoke, kneeling by her, and rather moaning thansaying the words, he started up, ashamed of himself, as his mother camein. she saw nothing, but her son a little paler, a little sterner than usual.
　　\"miss hale is hurt, mother. a stone has grazed her temple. she has lost agood deal of blood, i\"m afraid.\"
　　\"she looks very seriously hurt,--i could almost fancy her dead,\" saidmrs. thornton, a good deal alarmed.
　　\"it is only a fainting-fit. she has spoken to me since.\" but all the blood inhis body seemed to rush inwards to his heart as he spoke, and heabsolutely trembled.
　　\"go and call jane,--she can find me the things i want; and do you go toyour irish people, who are crying and shouting as if they were mad withfright.\"
&下&书_ 网



第75章 CHAPTER XXII A BLOW AND ITS CONSEQUENCES (4)


　　he went. he went away as if weights were tied to every limb that borehim from her. he called jane; he called his sister. she should have allwomanly care, all gentle tendance. but every pulse beat in him as heremembered how she had come down and placed herself in foremostdanger,--could it be to save him? at the time, he had pushed her aside,and spoken gruffly; he had seen nothing but the unnecessary danger shehad placed herself in. he went to his irish people, with every nerve inhis body thrilling at the thought of her, and found it difficult tounderstand enough of what they were saying to soothe and comfortaway their fears. there, they declared, they would not stop; theyclaimed to be sent back.
　　and so he had to think, and talk, and reason.
　　mrs. thornton bathed margaret\"s temples with eau de cologne. as thespirit touched the wound, which till then neither mrs. thornton nor janehad perceived, margaret opened her eyes; but it was evident she did notknow where she was, nor who they were. the dark circles deepened, thelips quivered and contracted, and she became insensible once more.
　　\"she has had a terrible blow,\" said mrs. thornton. \"is there any one whowill go for a doctor?\"
　　\"not me, ma\"am, if you please,\" said jane, shrinking back. \"them rabblemay be all about; i don\"t think the cut is so deep, ma\"am, as it looks.\"
　　\"i will not run the chance. she was hurt in our house. if you are acoward, jane, i am not. i will go.\"
　　\"pray, ma\"am, let me send one of the police. there\"s ever so many comeup, and soldiers too.\"
　　\"and yet you\"re afraid to go! i will not have their time taken up with ourerrands. they\"ll have enough to do to catch some of the mob. you willnot be afraid to stop in this house,\" she asked contemptuously, \"and goon bathing miss hale\"s forehead, shall you? i shall not be ten minutesaway.\"
　　\"couldn\"t hannah go, ma\"am?\"
　　\"why hannah? why any but you? no, jane, if you don\"t go, i do.\"
　　mrs. thornton went first to the room in which she had left fannystretched on the bed. she started up as her mother entered.
　　\"oh, mamma, how you terrified me! i thought you were a man that hadgot into the house.\"
　　\"nonsense! the men are all gone away. there are soldiers all round theplace, seeking for their work now it is too late. miss hale is lying on thedining-room sofa badly hurt. i am going for the doctor.\"
　　\"oh! don\"t, mamma! they\"ll murder you.\" she clung to he mother\"s gown.
　　mrs. thornton wrenched it away with no gentle hand.
　　\"find me some one else to go but that girl must not bleed to death.\"
　　\"bleed! oh, how horrid! how has she got hurt?\"
　　\"i don\"t know,--i have no time to ask. go down to her, fanny, and do tryto make yourself of use. jane is with her; and i trust it looks worse thanit is. jane has refused to leave the house, cowardly woman! and i won\"tput myself in the way of any more refusals from my servants, so i amgoing myself.\"
　　\"oh, dear, dear!\" said fanny, crying, and preparing to go down ratherthan be left alone, with the thought of wounds and bloodshed in thevery house.
　　\"oh, jane!\" said she, creeping into the dining-room, \"what is the matter?
　　how white she looks! how did she get hurt? did they throw stones intothe drawing-room?\"
　　margaret did indeed look white and wan, although her senses werebeginning to return to her. but the sickly daze of the swoon made herstill miserably faint. she was conscious of movement around her, and ofrefreshment from the eau de cologne, and a craving for the bathing togo on without intermission; but when they stopped to talk, she could nomore have opened her eyes, or spoken to ask for more bathing, than thepeople who lie in death-like trance can move, or utter sound, to arrestthe awful preparations for their burial, while they are yet fully aware,
　　not merely of the actions of those around them, but of the idea that isthe motive for such actions.
　　jane paused in her bathing, to reply to miss thornton\"s question.
　　\"she\"d have been safe enough, miss, if she\"d stayed in the drawing-room,or come up to us; we were in the front garret, and could see it all, out ofharm\"s way.\"
　　\"where was she, then?\" said fanny, drawing nearer by slow degrees, asshe became accustomed to the sight of margaret\"s pale face.
　　\"just before the front door--with master!\" said jane, significantly.
　　\"with john! with my brother! how did she get there?\"
 www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ



第76章 CHAPTER XXII A BLOW AND ITS CONSEQUENCES (5)


　　\"nay, miss, that\"s not for me to say,\" answered jane, with a slight toss ofher head. \"sarah did\"---\"
　　sarah what?\" said fanny, with impatient curiosity.
　　jane resumed her bathing, as if what sarah did or said was not exactlythe thing she liked to repeat.
　　\"sarah what?\" asked fanny, sharply. \"don\"t speak in these half sentences,or i can\"t understand you.\"
　　\"well, miss, since you will have it--sarah, you see, was in the best placefor seeing, being at the right-hand window; and she says, and said at thevery time too, that she saw miss hale with her arms about master\"sneck, hugging him before all the people.\"
　　\"i don\"t believe it,\" said fanny. \"i know she cares for my brother; any onecan see that; and i dare say, she\"d give her eyes if he\"d marry her,-whichhe never will, i can tell her. but i don\"t believe she\"d be so boldand forward as to put her arms round his neck.\"
　　\"poor young lady! she\"s paid for it dearly if she did. it\"s my belief, thatthe blow has given her such an ascendency of blood to the head as she\"llnever get the better from. she looks like a corpse now.\"
　　\"oh, i wish mamma would come!\" said fanny, wringing her hands. \"inever was in the room with a dead person before.\"
　　\"stay, miss! she\"s not dead: her eye-lids are quivering, and here\"s wettears a-coming down her cheeks. speak to her, miss fanny!\"
　　\"are you better now?\" asked fanny, in a quavering voice.
　　no answer; no sign of recognition; but a faint pink colour returned toher lips, although the rest of her face was ashen pale.
　　mrs. thornton came hurriedly in, with the nearest surgeon she couldfind.
　　\"how is she? are you better, my dear?\" as margaret opened her filmyeyes, and gazed dreamily at her. \"here is mr. lowe come to see you.\"
　　mrs. thornton spoke loudly and distinctly, as to a deaf person.
　　margaret tried to rise, and drew her ruffled, luxuriant hair instinctlyover the cut.
　　\"i am better now,\" said she, in a very low, faint voice. i was a little sick.\"
　　she let him take her hand and feel her pulse. the bright colour came fora moment into her face, when he asked to examine the wound in herforehead; and she glanced up at jane, as if shrinking from herinspection more than from the doctor\"s.
　　\"it is not much, i think. i am better now. i must go home.\"
　　\"not until i have applied some strips of plaster; and you have rested alittle.\"
　　she sat down hastily, without another word, and allowed it to be boundup.
　　\"now, if you please,\" said she, \"i must go. mamma will not see it, i think.
　　it is under the hair, is it not?\"
　　\"quite; no one could tell.\"
　　\"but you must not go,\" said mrs. thornton, impatiently. \"you are not fitto go.
　　\"i must,\" said margaret, decidedly. \"think of mamma. if they should hear---besides, i must go,\" said she, vehemently. \"i cannot stay here. may iask for a cab?\"
　　\"you are quite flushed and feverish,\" observed mr. lowe.
　　\"it is only with being here, when i do so want to go. the air--gettingaway, would do me more good than anything,\" pleaded she.
　　\"i really believe it is as she says,\" mr. lowe replied. \"if her mother is soill as you told me on the way here, it may be very serious if she hears ofthis riot, and does not see her daughter back at the time she expects. theinjury is not deep. i will fetch a cab, if your servants are still afraid togo out.\"
　　\"oh, thank you!\" said margaret. \"it will do me more good than anything.
　　it is the air of this room that makes me feel so miserable.\"
　　she leant back on the sofa, and closed her eyes. fanny beckoned hermother out of the room, and told her something that made her equallyanxious with margaret for the departure of the latter. not that she fullybelieved fanny\"s statement; but she credited enough to make hermanner to margaret appear very much constrained, at wishing her goodbye.
　　mr. lowe returned in the cab.
　　\"if you will allow me, i will see you home, miss hale. the streets arenot very quiet yet.\"
　　margaret\"s thoughts were quite alive enough to the present to make herdesirous of getting rid of both mr. lowe and the cab before she reachedcrampton crescent, for fear of alarming her father and mother. beyondthat one aim she would not look. that ugly dream of insolent wordsspoken about herself, could never be forgotten--but could be put asidetill she was stronger--for, oh! she was very weak; and her mind soughtfor some present fact to steady itself upon, and keep it from utterly
　　losing consciousness in another hideous, sickly swoon.
 /



第77章 CHAPTER XXIII MISTAKES (1)


　　\"which when his mother saw, she in her mindwas troubled sore, ne wist well what to ween.\"
　　spenser.
　　margaret had not been gone five minutes when mr. thornton came in,his face all a-glow.
　　\"i could not come sooner: the superintendent would---- where is she?\"
　　he looked round the dining-room, and then almost fiercely at hismother, who was quietly re-arranging the disturbed furniture, and didnot instantly reply. \"where is miss hale?\" asked he again.
　　\"gone home,\" said she, rather shortly.
　　\"gone home!\"
　　\"yes. she was a great deal better. indeed, i don\"t believe it was so verymuch of a hurt; only some people faint at the least thing.\"
　　\"i am sorry she is gone home,\" said he, walking uneasily about. \"shecould not have been fit for it.\"
　　\"she said she was; and mr. lowe said she was. i went for him myself.\"
　　\"thank you, mother.\" he stopped, and partly held out his hand to giveher a grateful shake. but she did not notice the movement.
　　\"what have you done with your irish people?\"
　　\"sent to the dragon for a good meal for them, poor wretches. and then,luckily, i caught father grady, and i\"ve asked him in to speak to them,and dissuade them from going off in a body. how did miss hale gohome? i\"m sure she could not walk.\"
　　\"she had a cab. everything was done properly, even to the paying. letus talk of something else. she has caused disturbance enough.\"
　　\"i don\"t know where i should have been but for her.\"
　　\"are you become so helpless as to have to be defended by a girl?\" askedmrs. thornton, scornfully.
　　he reddened. \"not many girls would have taken the blows on herselfwhich were meant for me;--meant with right down good-will, too.\"
　　\"a girl in love will do a good deal,\" replied mrs. thornton, shortly.
　　\"mother!\" he made a step forwards; stood still; heaved with passion.
　　she was a little startled at the evident force he used to keep himselfcalm. she was not sure of the nature of the emotions she had provoked.
　　it was only their violence that was clear. was it anger? his eyesglowed, his figure was dilated, his breath came thick and fast. it was amixture of joy, of anger, of pride, of glad surprise, of panting doubt; butshe could not read it. still it made her uneasy,--as the presence of allstrong feeling, of which the cause is not fully understood orsympathised in, always has this effect. she went to the side-board,opened a drawer, and took out a duster, which she kept there for anyoccasional purpose. she had seen a drop of eau de cologne on thepolished arm of the sofa, and instinctively sought to wipe it off. but shekept her back turned to her son much longer than was necessary; andwhen she spoke, her voice seemed unusual and constrained.
　　\"you have taken some steps about the rioters, i suppose? you don\"tapprehend any more violence, do you? where were the police? never athand when they\"re wanted!\"
　　\"on the contrary, i saw three or four of them, when the gates gave way,struggling and beating about in fine fashion; and more came running upjust when the yard was clearing. i might have given some of the fellowsin charge then, if i had had my wits about me. but there will be nodifficulty, plenty of people can identify them.\"
　　\"but won\"t they come back to-night?\"
　　\"i\"m going to see about a sufficient guard for the premises. i haveappointed to meet captain hanbury in half an hour at the station.\"
　　\"you must have some tea first.\"
　　\"tea! yes, i suppose i must. it\"s half-past six, and i may be out for sometime. don\"t sit up for me, mother.\"
　　\"you expect me to go to bed before i have seen you safe, do you?\"
　　\"well, perhaps not.\" he hesitated for a moment. \"but if i\"ve time, i shallgo round by crampton, after i\"ve arranged with the police and seenhamper and clarkson.\" their eyes met; they looked at each otherintently for a minute. then she asked:
　　\"why are you going round by crampton?\"
　　\"to ask after miss hale.\"
　　\"i will send. williams must take the water-bed she came to ask for. heshall inquire how she is.\"
　　\"i must go myself.\"
　　\"not merely to ask how miss hale is?\"
　　\"no, not merely for that. i want to thank her for the way in which shestood between me and the mob.\"
　　\"what made you go down at all? it was putting your head into the lion\"smouth!\"
　　he glanced sharply at her; saw that she did not know what had passedbetween him and margaret in the drawing-room; and replied by anotherquestion:
　　\"shall you be afraid to be left without me, until i can get some of thepolice; or had we better send williams for them now, and they could behere by the time we have done tea? there\"s no time to be lost. i must beoff in a quarter of an hour.\"
　　mrs. thornton left the room. her servants wondered at her directions,usually so sharply-cut and decided, now confused and uncertain. mr.
　　thornton remained in the dining-room, trying to think of the businesshe had to do at the police-office, and in reality thinking of margaret.
　　everything seemed dim and vague beyond--behind--besides the touchof her arms round his neck--the soft clinging which made the darkcolour come and go in his cheek as he thought of it.
　　the tea would have been very silent, but for fanny\"s perpetualdescription of her own feelings; how she had been alarmed--and thenthought they were gone --and then felt sick and faint and trembling inevery limb.
　　\"there, that\"s enough,\" said her brother, rising from the table. \"the realitywas enough for me.\" he was going to leave the room, when his motherstopped him with her hand upon his arm.
　　\"you will come back here before you go to the hales\", said she, in a low,anxious voice.
　　\"i know what i know,\" said fanny to herself.
　　\"why? will it be too late to disturb them?\"
　　\"john, come back to me for this one evening. it will be late for mrs.
　　hale. but that is not it. to-morrow, you will---- come back to-night,john!\" she had seldom pleaded with her son at all--she was too proudfor that: but she had never pleaded in vain.
　　\"i will return straight here after i have done my business you will besure to inquire after them?--after her?\"
www.56ｗen．ＣＯＭ下~书~网



第78章 CHAPTER XXIII MISTAKES (2)


　　mrs. thornton was by no means a talkative companion to fanny, noryet a good listener while her son was absent. but on his return, her eyesand ears were keen to see and to listen to all the details which he couldgive, as to the steps he had taken to secure himself, and those whom hechose to employ, from any repetition of the day\"s outrages. he clearlysaw his object. punishment and suffering, were the naturalconsequences to those who had taken part in the riot. all that wasnecessary, in order that property should be protected, and that the willof the proprietor might cut to his end, clean and sharp as a sword.
　　\"mother! you know what i have got to say to miss hale, to-morrow?\"
　　the question came upon her suddenly, during a pause in which she, atleast, had forgotten margaret.
　　she looked up at him.
　　\"yes! i do. you can hardly do otherwise.\"
　　\"do otherwise! i don\"t understand you.\"
　　\"i mean that, after allowing her feelings so to overcome her, i consideryou bound in honour--\"
　　\"bound in honour,\" said he, scornfully. \"i\"m afraid honour has nothing todo with it. \"her feelings overcome her!\" what feelings do you mean?\"
　　\"nay, john, there is no need to be angry. did she not rush down, andcling to you to save you from danger?\"
　　\"she did!\" said he. \"but, mother,\" continued he, stopping short in his walkright in front of her, \"i dare not hope. i never was fainthearted before;but i cannot believe such a creature cares for me.\"
　　\"don\"t be foolish, john. such a creature! why, she might be a duke\"sdaughter, to hear you speak. and what proof more would you have, iwonder, of her caring for you? i can believe she has had a struggle withher aristocratic way of viewing things; but i like her the better forseeing clearly at last. it is a good deal for me to say,\" said mrs.
　　thornton, smiling slowly, while the tears stood in her eyes; \"for after tonight,i stand second. it was to have you to myself, all to myself, a fewhours longer, that i begged you not to go till to-morrow!\"
　　\"dearest mother!\" (still love is selfish, and in an instant he reverted tohis own hopes and fears in a way that drew the cold creeping shadowover mrs. thornton\"s heart.) \"but i know she does not care for me. ishall put myself at her feet--i must. if it were but one chance in athousand--or a million--i should do it.\"
　　\"don\"t fear!\" said his mother, crushing down her own personalmortification at the little notice he had taken of the rare ebullition of hermaternal feelings--of the pang of jealousy that betrayed the intensity ofher disregarded love. \"don\"t be afraid,\" she said, coldly. \"as far as lovemay go she may be worthy of you. it must have taken a good deal toovercome her pride. don\"t be afraid, john,\" said she, kissing him, as shewished him good-night. and she went slowly and majestically out ofthe room. but when she got into her own, she locked the door, and satedown to cry unwonted tears.
　　margaret entered the room (where her father and mother still sat,holding low conversation together), looking very pale and white. shecame close up to them before she could trust herself to speak.
　　\"mrs. thornton will send the water-bed, mamma.\"
　　\"dear, how tired you look! is it very hot, margaret?\"
　　\"very hot, and the streets are rather rough with the strike.\"
　　margaret\"s colour came back vivid and bright as ever; but it faded awayinstantly.
　　\"here has been a message from bessy higgins, asking you to go to her,\"
　　said mrs. hale. \"but i\"m sure you look too tired.\"
　　\"yes!\" said margaret. \"i am tired, i cannot go.\"
　　she was very silent and trembling while she made tea. she was thankful
　　to see her father so much occupied with her mother as not to notice herlooks. even after her mother went to bed, he was not content to beabsent from her, but undertook to read her to sleep. margaret was alone.
www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ下*书 网



第79章 CHAPTER XXIII MISTAKES (3)


　　\"now i will think of it--now i will remember it all. i could not before--idared not.\" she sat still in her chair, her hands clasped on her knees, herlips compressed, her eyes fixed as one who sees a vision. she drew adeep breath.
　　\"i, who hate scenes--i, who have despised people for showing emotion-whohave thought them wanting in self-control--i went down and mustneeds throw myself into the melee, like a romantic fool! did i do anygood? they would have gone away without me i dare say.\" but this wasover-leaping the rational conclusion,--as in an instant her well-poisedjudgment felt. \"no, perhaps they would not. i did some good. but whatpossessed me to defend that man as if he were a helpless child! ah!\"
　　said she, clenching her hands together, \"it is no wonder those peoplethought i was in love with him, after disgracing myself in that way. i inlove--and with him too!\" her pale cheeks suddenly became one flame offire; and she covered her face with her hands. when she took themaway, her palms were wet with scalding tears.
　　\"oh how low i am fallen that they should say that of me! i could nothave been so brave for any one else, just because he was so utterlyindifferent to me--if, indeed, i do not positively dislike him. it made methe more anxious that there should be fair play on each side; and i couldsee what fair play was. it was not fair, said she, vehemently, \"that heshould stand there--sheltered, awaiting the soldiers, who might catchthose poor maddened creatures as in a trap--without an effort on hispart, to bring them to reason. and it was worse than unfair for them toset on him as they threatened. i would do it again, let who will say whatthey like of me. if i saved one blow, one cruel, angry action that mightotherwise have been committed, i did a woman\"s work. let them insultmy maiden pride as they will--i walk pure before god!\"
　　she looked up, and a noble peace seemed to descend and calm her face,till it was \"stiller than chiselled marble.\"
　　dixon came in:
　　\"if you please, miss margaret, here\"s the water-bed from mrs.
　　thornton\"s. it\"s too late for to-night, i\"m afraid, for missus is nearlyasleep: but it will do nicely for to-morrow.\"
　　\"very,\" said margaret. \"you must send our best thanks.\"
　　dixon left the room for a moment.
　　\"if you please, miss margaret, he says he\"s to ask particular how youare. i think he must mean missus; but he says his last words were, to askhow miss hale was.\"
　　\"me!\" said margaret, drawing herself up. \"i am quite well. tell him i am
　　perfectly well.\" but her complexion was as deadly white as herhandkerchief; and her head ached intensely.
　　mr. hale now came in. he had left his sleeping wife; and wanted, asmargaret saw, to be amused and interested by something that she was totell him. with sweet patience did she bear her pain, without a word ofcomplaint; and rummaged up numberless small subjects forconversation--all except the riot, and that she never named once. itturned her sick to think of it.
　　\"good-night, margaret. i have every chance of a good night myself, andyou are looking very pale with your watching. i shall call dixon if yourmother needs anything. do you go to bed and sleep like a top; for i\"msure you need it, poor child!\"
　　\"good-night, papa.\"
　　she let her colour go--the forced smile fade away--the eyes grow dullwith heavy pain. she released her strong will from its laborious task.
　　till morning she might feel ill and weary.
　　she lay down and never stirred. to move hand or foot, or even so muchas one finger, would have been an exertion beyond the powers of eithervolition or motion. she was so tired, so stunned, that she thought shenever slept at all; her feverish thoughts passed and repassed theboundary between sleeping and waking, and kept their own miserableidentity. she could not be alone, prostrate, powerless as she was,--acloud of faces looked up at her, giving her no idea of fierce vivid anger,or of personal danger, but a deep sense of shame that she should thus bethe object of universal regard--a sense of shame so acute that it seemedas if she would fain have burrowed into the earth to hide herself, andyet she could not escape out of that unwinking glare of many eyes.
wＷw。xiabｏok.com



第80章 CHAPTER XXIV MISTAKES CLEARED UP (1)


　　\"your beauty was the first that won the place,and scal\"d the walls of my undaunted heart,which, captive now, pines in a caitive case,unkindly met with rigour for desert;-yet not the less your servant shall abide,
　　in spite of rude repulse or silent pride.\"
　　william fowler.
　　the next morning, margaret dragged herself up, thankful that the nightwas over,--unrefreshed, yet rested. all had gone well through the house;her mother had only wakened once. a little breeze was stirring in thehot air, and though there were no trees to show the playful tossingmovement caused by the wind among the leaves, margaret knew how,somewhere or another, by way-side, in copses, or in thick green woods,there was a pleasant, murmuring, dancing sound,--a rushing and fallingnoise, the very thought of which was an echo of distant gladness in herheart.
　　she sat at her work in mrs. hale\"s room. as soon as that fore-noonslumber was over, she would help her mother to dress after. dinner, shewould go and see bessy higgins. she would banish all recollection ofthe thornton family,--no need to think of them till they absolutely stoodbefore her in flesh and blood. but, of course, the effort not to think ofthem brought them only the more strongly before her; and from time totime, the hot flush came over her pale face sweeping it into colour, as asunbeam from between watery clouds comes swiftly moving over thesea.
　　dixon opened the door very softly, and stole on tiptoe up to margaret,sitting by the shaded window.
　　\"mr. thornton, miss margaret. he is in the drawing-room.\"
　　margaret dropped her sewing.
　　\"did he ask for me? isn\"t papa come in?\"
　　\"he asked for you, miss; and master is out.\"
　　\"very well, i will come,\" said margaret, quietly. but she lingeredstrangely.
　　mr. thornton stood by one of the windows, with his back to the door,apparently absorbed in watching something in the street. but, in truth,he was afraid of himself. his heart beat thick at the thought of hercoming. he could not forget the touch of her arms around his neck,impatiently felt as it had been at the time; but now the recollection ofher clinging defence of him, seemed to thrill him through and through,-tomelt away every resolution, all power of self-control, as if it werewax before a fire. he dreaded lest he should go forwards to meet her,with his arms held out in mute entreaty that she would come and nestlethere, as she had done, all unheeded, the day before, but never unheededagain. his heart throbbed loud and quick strong man as he was, hetrembled at the anticipation of what he had to say, and how it might bereceived. she might droop, and flush, and flutter to his arms, as to hernatural home and resting-place. one moment, he glowed withimpatience at the thought that she might do this, the next, he feared a
　　passionate rejection, the very idea of which withered up his future withso deadly a blight that he refused to think of it. he was startled by thesense of the presence of some one else in the room. he turned round.
　　she had come in so gently, that he had never heard her; the street noiseshad been more distinct to his inattentive ear than her slow movements,in her soft muslin gown.
　　she stood by the table, not offering to sit down. her eyelids weredropped half over her eyes; her teeth were shut, not compressed; herlips were just parted over them, allowing the white line to be seenbetween their curve. her slow deep breathings dilated her thin andbeautiful nostrils; it was the only motion visible on her countenance.
　　the fine-grained skin, the oval cheek, the rich outline of her mouth, itscorners deep set in dimples,--were all wan and pale to-day; the loss oftheir usual natural healthy colour being made more evident by theheavy shadow of the dark hair, brought down upon the temples, to hideall sign of the blow she had received. her head, for all its droopingeyes, was thrown a little back, in the old proud attitude. her long armshung motion-less by her sides. altogether she looked like someprisoner, falsely accused of a crime that she loathed and despised, andfrom which she was too indignant to justify herselfmr. thornton made a hasty step or two forwards; recovered himself,and went with quiet firmness to the door (which she had left open), andshut it. then he came back, and stood opposite to her for a moment,receiving the general impression of her beautiful presence, before hedared to disturb it, perhaps to repel it, by what he had to say.
　　\"miss hale, i was very ungrateful yesterday--\"
　　\"you had nothing to be grateful for,\" said she, raising her eyes, andlooking full and straight at him. \"you mean, i suppose, that you believeyou ought to thank me for what i did.\" in spite of herself--in defiance ofher anger--the thick blushes came all over her face, and burnt into hervery eyes; which fell not nevertheless from their grave and steady look.
　　\"it was only a natural instinct; any woman would have done just thesame. we all feel the sanctity of our sex as a high privilege when wesee danger. i ought rather,\" said she, hastily, \"to apologise to you, forhaving said thoughtless words which sent you down into the danger.\"
　　\"it was not your words; it was the truth they conveyed, pun-gently as itwas expressed. but you shall not drive me off upon that, and so escapethe expression of my deep gratitude, my--\" he was on the verge now; hewould not speak in the haste of his hot passion; he would weigh eachword. he would; and his will was triumphant. he stopped in mid career.
www.xiabook.com   www.ｌzuoＷen．Ｃom



第81章 CHAPTER XXIV MISTAKES CLEARED UP (2)


　　\"i do not try to escape from anything,\" said she. \"i simply say, that youowe me no gratitude; and i may add, that any expression of it will bepainful to me, because i do not feel that i deserve it. still, if it will
　　relieve you from even a fancied obligation, speak on.\"
　　\"i do not want to be relieved from any obligation,\" said he, goaded byher calm manner. fancied, or not fancied--i question not myself toknow which--i choose to believe that i owe my very life to you--ay-smile,and think it an exaggeration if you will. i believe it, because itadds a value to that life to think--oh, miss hale!\" continued he, loweringhis voice to such a tender intensity of passion that she shivered andtrembled before him, \"to think circumstance so wrought, that whenever iexult in existence henceforward, i may say to myself, \"all this gladnessin life, all honest pride in doing my work in the world, all this keensense of being, i owe to her!\" and it doubles the gladness, it makes thepride glow, it sharpens the sense of existence till i hardly know if it ispain or pleasure, to think that i owe it to one--nay, you must, you shallhear\"--said he, stepping forwards with stern determination--\"to onewhom i love, as i do not believe man ever loved woman before.\" heheld her hand tight in his. he panted as he listened for what shouldcome. he threw the hand away with indignation, as he heard her icytone; for icy it was, though the words came faltering out, as if she knewnot where to find them.
　　\"your way of speaking shocks me. it is blasphemous. i cannot help it, ifthat is my first feeling. it might not be so, i dare say, if i understood thekind of feeling you describe. i do not want to vex you; and besides, wemust speak gently, for mamma is asleep; but your whole manneroffends me--\"
　　\"how!\" exclaimed he. \"offends you! i am indeed most unfortunate.\"
　　\"yes!\" said she, with recovered dignity. \"i do feel offended; and, i think,justly. you seem to fancy that my conduct of yesterday\"--again the deepcarnation blush, but this time with eyes kindling with indignation ratherthan shame--\"was a personal act between you and me; and that you maycome and thank me for it, instead of perceiving, as a gentleman would-yes!
　　a gentleman,\" she repeated, in allusion to their former conversationabout that word, \"that any woman, worthy of the name of woman, wouldcome forward to shield, with her reverenced helplessness, a man indanger from the violence of numbers.\"
　　\"and the gentleman thus rescued is forbidden the relief of thanks!\" hebroke in contemptuously. \"i am a man. i claim the right of expressingmy feelings.\"
　　\"and i yielded to the right; simply saying that you gave me pain byinsisting upon it,\" she replied, proudly. \"but you seem to have imagined,that i was not merely guided by womanly instinct, but\"--and here thepassionate tears (kept down for long--struggled with vehemently) cameup into her eyes, and choked her voice--\"but that i was prompted bysome particular feeling for you--you! why, there was not a man--not a
　　poor desperate man in all that crowd--for whom i had not moresympathy--for whom i should not have done what little i could moreheartily.\"
　　\"you may speak on, miss hale. i am aware of all these misplacedsympathies of yours. i now believe that it was only your innate sense ofoppression--(yes; i, though a master, may be oppressed)--that made youact so nobly as you did. i know you despise me; allow me to say, it isbecause you do not understand me.\"
　　\"i do not care to understand,\" she replied, taking hold of the table tosteady herself; for she thought him cruel--as, indeed, he was--and shewas weak with her indignation.
　　\"no, i see you do not. you are unfair and unjust.\"
　　margaret compressed her lips. she would not speak in answer to suchaccusations. but, for all that--for all his savage words, he could havethrown himself at her feet, and kissed the hem of her wounded pride fellhot and fast. he waited awhile, longing for garment. she did not speak;she did not move. the tears of her to say something, even a taunt, towhich he might reply. but she was silent. he took up his hat.
　　\"one word more. you look as if you thought it tainted you to be lovedby me. you cannot avoid it. nay, i, if i would, cannot cleanse you fromit. but i would not, if i could. i have never loved any woman before: mylife has been too busy, my thoughts too much absorbed with otherthings. now i love, and will love. but do not be afraid of too muchexpression on my part.\"
　　\"i am not afraid,\" she replied, lifting herself straight up. \"no one yet hasever dared to be impertinent to me, and no one ever shall. but, mr.
　　thornton, you have been very kind to my father,\" said she, changing herwhole tone and bearing to a most womanly softness. \"don\"t let us go onmaking each other angry. pray don\"t!\" he took no notice of her words:
　　he occupied himself in smoothing the nap of his hat with his coat-sleeve, for half a minute or so; and then, rejecting her offered hand, andmaking as if he did not see her grave look of regret, he turned abruptlyaway, and left the room. margaret caught one glance at his face beforehe went.
　　when he was gone, she thought she had seen the gleam of washed tearsin his eyes; and that turned her proud dislike into something differentand kinder, if nearly as painful--self-reproach for having caused suchmortification to any one.
　　\"but how could i help it?\" asked she of herself. \"i never liked him. i wascivil; but i took no trouble to conceal my indifference. indeed, i neverthought about myself or him, so my manners must have shown thetruth. all that yesterday, he might mistake. but that is his fault, notmine. i would do it again, if need were, though it does lead me into all
　　this shame and trouble.\"
wwＷ、xiabook.com   



第82章 CHAPTER XXV FREDERICK(1)


　　\"revenge may have her own;roused discipline aloud proclaims their cause,and injured navies urge their broken laws.\"
　　byron.
　　margaret began to wonder whether all offers were as unexpectedbeforehand,--as distressing at the time of their occurrence, as the twoshe had had. an involuntary comparison between mr. lennox and mr.
　　thornton arose in her mind. she had been sorry, that an expression ofany other feeling than friendship had been lured out by circumstancesfrom henry lennox. that regret was the predominant feeling, on thefirst occasion of her receiving a proposal. she had not felt so stunned-soimpressed as she did now, when echoes of mr. thornton\"s voice yetlingered about the room. in lennox\"s case, he seemed for a moment tohave slid over the boundary between friendship and love; and theinstant afterwards, to regret it nearly as much as she did, although fordifferent reasons. in mr. thornton\"s case, as far as margaret knew, therewas no intervening stage of friendship. their intercourse had been onecontinued series of opposition. their opinions clashed; and indeed, shehad never perceived that he had cared for her opinions, as belonging toher, the individual. as far as they defied his rock-like power ofcharacter, his passion-strength, he seemed to throw them off from himwith contempt, until she felt the weariness of the exertion of makinguseless protests; and now, he had come, in this strange wild passionateway, to make known his love for, although at first it had struck her, thathis offer was forced and goaded out of him by sharp compassion for theexposure she had made of herself,--which he, like others, mightmisunderstand--yet, even before he left the room,--and certainly, notfive minutes after, the clear conviction dawned upon her, shined brightupon her, that he did love her; that he had loved her; that he would loveher. and she shrank and shuddered as under the fascination of somegreat power, repugnant to her whole previous life. she crept away, andhid from his idea. but it was of no use. to parody a line oat of fairfax\"stasso-
　　\"his strong idea wandered through her thought.\"
　　she disliked him the more for having mastered her inner will. howdared he say that he would love her still, even though she shook him offwith contempt? she wished she had spoken more--stronger. sharp,decisive speeches came thronging into her mind, now that it was toolate to utter them. the deep impression made by the interview, was likethat of a horror in a dream; that will not leave the room although wewaken up, and rub our eyes, and force a stiff rigid smile upon our lips.
　　it is there--there, cowering and gibbering, with fixed ghastly eyes, insome corner of the chamber, listening to hear whether we dare tobreathe of its presence to any one. and we dare not; poor cowards thatwe are!
　　and so she shuddered away from the threat of his enduring love. whatdid he mean? had she not the power to daunt him? she would see. itwas more daring than became a man to threaten her so. did he ground itupon the miserable yesterday? if need were, she would do the same tomorrow,--by a crippled beggar, willingly and gladly,--but by him, shewould do it, just as bravely, in spite of his deductions, and the coldslime of women\"s impertinence. she did it because it was right, andsimple, and true to save where she could save; even to try to save. \"faisce que dois, advienne que pourra.\"
　　hitherto she had not stirred from where he had left her; no outwardcircumstances had roused her out of the trance of thought in which shehad been plunged by his last words, and by the look of his deep intentpassionate eyes, as their flames had made her own fall before them. shewent to the window, and threw it open, to dispel the oppression whichhung around her. then she went and opened the door, with a sort ofimpetuous wish to shake off the recollection of the past hour in thecompany of others, or in active exertion. but all was profoundly hushedin the noonday stillness of a house, where an invalid catches theunrefreshing sleep that is denied to the night-hours. margaret would notbe alone. what should she do? \"go and see bessy higgins, of course,\"
　　thought she, as the recollection of the message sent the night beforeflashed into her mind. and away she went.
　　when she got there, she found bessy lying on the settle, moved close tothe fire, though the day was sultry and oppressive. she was laid downquite flat, as if resting languidly after some paroxysm of pain. margaretfelt sure she ought to have the greater freedom of breathing which amore sitting posture would procure; and, without a word, she raised herup, and so arranged the pillows, that bessy was more at ease, thoughvery languid.
　　\"i thought i should na\" ha\" seen yo\" again,\" said she, at last, lookingwistfully in margaret\"s face.
　　\"i\"m afraid you\"re much worse. but i could not have come yesterday, mymother was so ill--for many reasons,\" said margaret, colouring.
　　\"yo\"d m\"appen think i went beyond my place in sending mary for yo\".
　　but the wranglin\" and the loud voices had just torn me to pieces, and ithought when father left, oh! if i could just hear her voice, reading mesome words o\" peace and promise, i could die away into the silence andrest o\" god, lust as a babby is hushed up to sleep by its mother\"s lullaby.\"
　　\"shall i read you a chapter, now?\"
　　\"ay, do! m\"appen i shan\"t listen to th\" sense, at first; it will seem faraway--but when yo\" come to words i like--to th\" comforting texts--it\"llseem close in my ear, and going through me as it were.\"
　　margaret began. bessy tossed to and fro. if, by an effort, she attendedfor one moment, it seemed as though she were convulsed into doublerestlessness the next. at last, she burst out \"don\"t go on reading. it\"s nouse. i\"m blaspheming all the time in my mind, wi\" thinking angrily onwhat canna be helped.--yo\"d hear of th\" riot, m\"appen, yesterday atmarlborough mills? thornton\"s factory, yo\" know.\"
　　\"your father was not there, was he?\" said margaret, colouring deep.
　　\"not he. he\"d ha\" given his right hand if it had never come to pass. it\"sthat that\"s fretting me. he\"s fairly knocked down in his mind by it. it\"sno use telling him, fools will always break out o bounds. yo\" never sawa man so down-hearted as he is.\"
　　\"but why?\" asked margaret. \"i don\"t understand.\"




第83章 CHAPTER XXV FREDERICK(2)


　　\"why yo\" see, he\"s a committee-man on this special strike\". th\" unionappointed him because, though i say it as shouldn\"t say it, he\"s reckoneda deep chap, and true to th\" back-bone. and he and t other committeemenlaid their plans. they were to hou\"d together through thick andthin; what the major part thought, t\"others were to think, whether theywould or no. and above all there was to be no going again the law ofthe land. folk would go with them if they saw them striving andstarving wi\" dumb patience; but if there was once any noise o\" fightingand struggling--even wi\" knobsticks--all was up, as they knew by th\"
　　experience of many, and many a time before. they would try and getspeech o\" th\" knobsticks, and coax \"em, and reason wi\" \"em, and m\"appenwarn \"em off; but whatever came, the committee charged all memberso\" th\" union to lie down and die, if need were, without striking a blow;and then they reckoned they were sure o\" carrying th\" public with them.
　　and beside all that, committee knew they were right in their demand,and they didn\"t want to have right all mixed up wi\" wrong, till folk can\"tseparate it, no more nor i can th\" physic-powder from th\" jelly yo\" gaveme to mix it in; jelly is much the biggest, but powder tastes it allthrough. well, i\"ve told yo\" at length about this\"n, but i\"m tired out. yo\"
　　just think for yo\"rsel, what it mun be for father to have a\" his work
　　undone, and by such a fool as boucher, who must needs go right againthe orders of committee, and ruin th\" strike, just as bad as if he meant tobe a judas. eh! but father giv\"d it him last night! he went so far as tosay, he\"d go and tell police where they might find th\" ringleader o\" th\"
　　riot; he\"d give him up to th\" mill-owners to do what they would wi\" him.
　　he\"d show the world that th\" real leaders o\" the strike were not such asboucher, but steady thoughtful men; good hands, and good citizens,who were friendly to law and judgment, and would uphold order; whoonly wanted their right wage, and wouldn\"t work, even though theystarved, till they got \"em; but who would ne\"er injure property or life:
　　for,\" dropping her voice, \"they do say, that boucher threw a stone atthornton\"s sister, that welly killed her.\"
　　\"that\"s not true,\" said margaret. \"it was not boucher that threw the stone\"-she went first red, then white.
　　\"yo\"d be there then, were yo\"?\" asked bessy languidly for indeed, shehad spoken with many pauses, as if speech was unusually difficult toher.
　　\"yes. never mind. go on. only it was not boucher that threw the stone.
　　but what did he answer to your father?\"
　　\"he did na\" speak words. he were all in such a tremble wi\" spentpassion, i could na\" bear to look at him. i heard his breath coming quick,and at one time i thought he were sobbing. but when father said he\"dgive him up to police, he gave a great cry, and struck father on th\" facewi\" his closed fist, and he off like lightning. father were stunned wi\" theblow at first, for all boucher were weak wi\" passion and wi\" clemming.
　　he sat down a bit, and put his hand afore his eyes; and then made for th\"
　　door. i dunno\" where i got strength, but i threw mysel\" off th\" settle andclung to him. \"father, father!\" said i. \"thou\"ll never go peach on thatpoor clemmed man. i\"ll never leave go on thee, till thou sayst thouwunnot.\" \"dunnot be a fool,\" says he, \"words come readier than deedsto most men. i never thought o\" telling th\" police on him; though by g--,he deserves it, and i should na\" ha\" minded if some one else had donethe dirty work, and got him clapped up. but now he has strucken me, icould do it less nor ever, for it would be getting other men to take upmy quarrel. but if ever he gets well o\"er this clemming, and is in goodcondition, he and i\"ll have an up and down fight, purring an\" a\", and i\"llsee what i can do for him.\" and so father shook me off,--for indeed, iwas low and faint enough, and his face was all clay white, where itweren\"t bloody, and turned me sick to look at. and i know not if i sleptor waked, or were in a dead swoon, till mary come in; and i telled herto fetch yo\" to me. and now dunnot talk to me, but just read out th\"
　　chapter. i\"m easier in my mind for having spit it out; but i want somethoughts of the world that\"s far away to take the weary taste of it out o\"
　　my mouth. read me--not a sermon chapter, but a story chapter; they\"vepictures in them, which i see when my eyes are shut. read about thenew heavens, and the new earth; and m\"appen i\"ll forget this.\"
　　margaret read in her soft low voice. though bessy\"s eyes were shut, shewas listening for some time, for the moisture of tears gathered heavy onher eyelashes. at last she slept; with many starts, and mutteredpleadings. margaret covered her up, and left her, for she had an uneasyconsciousness that she might be wanted at home, and yet, until now, itseemed cruel to leave the dying girl.
　　mrs. hale was in the drawing-room on her daughter\"s return. it was oneof her better days, and she was full of praises of the water-bed. it hadbeen more like the beds at sir john beresford\"s than anything she hadslept on since. she did not know how it was, but people seemed to havelost the art of making the same kind of beds as they used to do in heryouth. one would think it was easy enough; there was the same kind offeathers to be had, and yet somehow, till this last night she did not knowwhen she had had a good sound resting sleep.
　　mr. hale suggested, that something of the merits of the featherbeds offormer days might be attributed to the activity of youth, which gave arelish to rest; but this idea was not kindly received by his wife.
　　\"no, indeed, mr. hale, it was those beds at sir john\"s. now, margaret,you\"re young enough, and go about in the day; are the bedscomfortable? i appeal to you. do they give you a feeling of perfectrepose when you lie down upon them; or rather, don\"t you toss about,and try in vain to find an easy position, and waken in the morning astired as when you went to bed?\"
　　margaret laughed. \"to tell the truth, mamma, i\"ve never thought aboutmy bed at all, what kind it is. i\"m so sleepy at night, that if i only liedown anywhere, i nap off directly. so i don\"t think i\"m a competentwitness. but then, you know, i never had the opportunity of trying sirjohn beresford\"s beds. i never was at oxenham.\"




第84章 CHAPTER XXV FREDERICK(3)


　　\"were not you? oh, no! to be sure. it was poor darling fred i took withme, i remember. i only went to oxenham once after i was married,--toyour aunt shaw\"s wedding; and poor little fred was the baby then. andi know dixon did not like changing from lady\"s maid to nurse, and iwas afraid that if i took her near her old home, and amongst her ownpeople, she might want to leave me. but poor baby was taken ill atoxenham, with his teething; and, what with my being a great deal withanna just before her marriage, and not being very strong myself, dixonhad more of the charge of him than she ever had before; and it made herso fond of him, and she was so proud when he would turn away fromevery one and cling to her, that i don\"t believe she ever thought ofleaving me again; though it was very different from what she\"d been
　　accustomed to. poor fred! every body loved him. he was born with thegift of winning hearts. it makes me think very badly of captain reidwhen i know that he disliked my own dear boy. i think it a certain proofhe had a bad heart. ah! your poor father, margaret. he has left theroom. he can\"t bear to hear fred spoken of.\"
　　\"i love to hear about him, mamma. tell me all you like; you never cantell me too much. tell me what he was like as a baby.\"
　　\"why, margaret, you must not be hurt, but he was much prettier thanyou were. i remember, when i first saw you in dixon\"s arms, i said,\"dear, what an ugly little thing!\" and she said, \"it\"s not every childthat\"s like master fred, bless him!\" dear! how well i remember it. theni could have had fred in my arms every minute of the day, and his cotwas close by my bed; and now,now--margaret--i don\"t know where myboy is, and sometimes i think i shall never see him again.\"
　　margaret sat down by her mother\"s sofa on a little stool, and softly tookhold of her hand, caressing it and kissing it, as if to comfort. mrs. halecried without restraint. at last, she sat straight, stiff up on the sofa, andturning round to her daughter, she said with tearful, almost solemnearnestness, \"margaret, if i can get better,--if god lets me have a chanceof recovery, it must be through seeing my son frederick once more. itwill waken up all the poor springs of health left in me.
　　she paused, and seemed to try and gather strength for something moreyet to be said. her voice was choked as she went on--was quavering aswith the contemplation of some strange, yet closely-present idea.
　　\"and, margaret, if i am to die--if i am one of those appointed to diebefore many weeks are over--i must see my child first. i cannot thinkhow it must be managed; but i charge you, margaret, as you yourselfhope for comfort in your last illness, bring him to me that i may blesshim. only for five minutes, margaret. there could be no danger in fiveminutes. oh, margaret, let me see him before i die!\"
　　margaret did not think of anything that might be utterly unreasonable inthis speech: we do not look for reason or logic in the passionateentreaties of those who are sick unto death; we are stung with therecollection of a thousand slighted opportunities of fulfilling the wishesof those who will soon pass away from among us: and do they ask usfor the future happiness of our lives, we lay it at their feet, and will itaway from us. but this wish of mrs. hale\"s was so natural, so just, soright to both parties, that margaret felt as if, on frederick\"s account aswell as on her mother\"s, she ought to overlook all intermediate chancesof danger, and pledge herself to do everything in her power for itsrealisation. the large, pleading, dilated eyes were fixed upon herwistfully, steady in their gaze, though the poor white lips quivered likethose of a child. margaret gently rose up and stood opposite to her frail
　　mother; so that she might gather the secure fulfilment of her wish fromthe calm steadiness of her daughter\"s face.
　　\"mamma, i will write to-night, and tell frederick what you say. i am assure that he will come directly to us, as i am sure of my life. be easy,mamma, you shall see him as far as anything earthly can be promised.\"
　　\"you will write to-night? oh, margaret! the post goes out at five--youwill write by it, won\"t you? i have so few hours left--i feel, dear, as if ishould not recover, though sometimes your father over-persuades meinto hoping; you will write directly, won\"t you? don\"t lose a single post;for just by that very post i may miss him.\"
　　\"but, mamma, papa is out.\"
wwＷ．lzuｏwen.com



第85章 CHAPTER XXV FREDERICK(4)


　　\"papa is out! and what then? do you mean that he would deny me thislast wish, margaret? why, i should not be ill--be dying--if he had nottaken me away from helstone, to this unhealthy, smoky, sunless place.\"
　　\"oh, mamma!\" said margaret.
　　\"yes; it is so, indeed. he knows it himself; he has said so many a time.
　　he would do anything for me; you don\"t mean he would refuse me thislast wish-- prayer, if you will. and, indeed, margaret, the longing to seefrederick stands between me and god. i cannot pray till i have this onething; indeed, i cannot. don\"t lose time, dear, dear margaret. write bythis very next post. then he may be here--here in twenty-two days! forhe is sure to come. no cords or chains can keep him. in twenty-twodays i shall see my boy.\" she fell back, and for a short time she took nonotice of the fact that margaret sat motionless, her hand shading hereyes.
　　\"you are not writing!\" said her mother at last \"bring me some pens andpaper; i will try and write myself.\" she sat up, trembling all over withfeverish eagerness. margaret took her hand down and looked at hermother sadly.
　　\"only wait till papa comes in. let us ask him how best to do it.\"
　　\"you promised, margaret, not a quarter of an hour ago;--you said heshould come.\"
　　\"and so he shall, mamma; don\"t cry, my own dear mother. i\"ll writehere, now,--you shall see me write,--and it shall go by this very post;and if papa thinks fit, he can write again when he comes in,--it is only aday\"s delay. oh, mamma, don\"t cry so pitifully,--it cuts me to the heart.\"
　　mrs. hale could not stop her tears; they came hysterically; and, in truth,she made no effort to control them, but rather called up all the picturesof the happy past, and the probable future--painting the scene when sheshould lie a corpse, with the son she had longed to see in life weepingover her, and she unconscious of his presence--till she was melted byself-pity into a state of sobbing and exhaustion that made margaret\"sheart ache. but at last she was calm, and greedily watched her daughter,
　　as she began her letter; wrote it with swift urgent entreaty; sealed it uphurriedly, for fear her mother should ask to see it: and then, to makesecurity most sure, at mrs. hale\"s own bidding, took it herself to thepost-office. she was coming home when her father overtook her.
　　\"and where have you been, my pretty maid?\" asked he.
　　\"to the post-office,--with a letter; a letter to frederick. oh, papa,perhaps i have done wrong: but mamma was seized with such apassionate yearning to see him--she said it would make her well again,-andthen she said that she must see him before she died,--i cannot tellyou how urgent she was! did i do wrong?\"
　　mr. hale did not reply at first. then he said:
　　\"you should have waited till i came in, margaret.\"
　　\"i tried to persuade her--\" and then she was silent.
　　\"i don\"t know,\" said mr. hale, after a pause. \"she ought to see him if shewishes it so much, for i believe it would do her much more good thanall the doctor\"s medicine,--and, perhaps, set her up altogether; but thedanger to him, i\"m afraid, is very great.\"
　　\"all these years since the mutiny, papa?\"
　　\"yes; it is necessary, of course, for government to take very stringentmeasures for the repression of offences against authority, moreparticularly in the navy, where a commanding officer needs to besurrounded in his men\"s eyes with a vivid consciousness of all thepower there is at home to back him, and take up his cause, and avengeany injuries offered to him, if need be. ah! it\"s no matter to them howfar their authorities have tyrannised,--galled hasty tempers to madness,-or,if that can be any excuse afterwards, it is never allowed for in thefirst instance; they spare no expense, they send out ships,--they scourthe seas to lay hold of the offenders,--the lapse of years does not washout the memory of the offence,--it is a fresh and vivid crime on theadmiralty books till it is blotted out by blood.\"
　　\"oh, papa, what have i done! and yet it seemed so right at the time. i\"msure frederick himself, would run the risk.\"
　　\"so he would; so he should! nay, margaret, i\"m glad it is done, though idurst not have done it myself. i\"m thankful it is as it is; i should havehesitated till, perhaps, it might have been too late to do any good. dearmargaret, you have done what is right about it; and the end is beyondour control.\"
　　it was all very well; but her father\"s account of the relentless manner inwhich mutinies were punished made margaret shiver and creep. if shehad decoyed her brother home to blot out the memory of his error by hisblood! she saw her father\"s anxiety lay deeper than the source of hislatter cheering words. she took his arm and walked home pensively andwearily by his side.




第86章 CHAPTER I MOTHER AND SON(1)


　　\"i have found that holy place of reststill changeless.\"
　　mrs. hemans.
　　when mr. thornton had left the house that morning he was almostblinded by his baffled passion. he was as dizzy as if margaret, insteadof looking, and speaking, and moving like a tender graceful woman,had been a sturdy fish-wife, and given him a sound blow with her fists.
　　he had positive bodily pain,--a violent headache, and a throbbingintermittent pulse. he could not bear the noise, the garish light, thecontinued rumble and movement of the street. he called himself a foolfor suffering so; and yet he could not, at the moment, recollect the causeof his suffering, and whether it was adequate to the consequences it hadproduced. it would have been a relief to him, if he could have sat downand cried on a door-step by a little child, who was raging and storming,through his passionate tears, at some injury he had received. he said tohimself, that he hated margaret, but a wild, sharp sensation of love clefthis dull, thunderous feeling like lightning, even as he shaped the words
　　expressive of hatred. his greatest comfort was in hugging his torment;and in feeling, as he had indeed said to her, that though she mightdespise him, contemn him, treat him with her proud sovereignindifference, he did not change one whit. she could not make himchange. he loved her, and would love her; and defy her, and thismiserable bodily pain.
　　he stood still for a moment, to make this resolution firm and clear.
　　there was an omnibus passing--going into the country; the conductorthought he was wishing for a place, and stopped near the pavement. itwas too much trouble to apologise and explain; so he mounted upon it,and was borne away,--past long rows of houses--then past detachedvillas with trim gardens, till they came to real country hedge-rows, and,by-and-by, to a small country town. then every body got down; and sodid mr. thornton, and because they walked away he did so too. hewent into the fields, walking briskly, because the sharp motion relievedhis mind. he could remember all about it now; the pitiful figure he musthave cut; the absurd way in which he had gone and done the very thinghe had so often agreed with himself in thinking would be the mostfoolish thing in the world; and had met with exactly the consequenceswhich, in these wise moods, he had always fore-told were certain tofollow, if he ever did make such a fool of himself. was he bewitched bythose beautiful eyes, that soft, half-open, sighing mouth which lay soclose upon his shoulder only yesterday? he could not even shake off therecollection that she had been there; that her arms had been round him,once--if never again. he only caught glimpses of her; he did notunderstand her altogether. at one time she was so brave, and at anotherso timid; now so tender, and then so haughty and regal-proud. and thenhe thought over every time he had ever seen her once again, by way offinally forgetting her. he saw her in every dress, in every mood, and didnot know which became her best. even this morning, how magnificentshe had looked,--her eyes flashing out upon him at the idea that,because she had shared his danger yesterday, she had cared for him theleast!
　　if mr. thornton was a fool in the morning, as he assured himself at leasttwenty times he was, he did not grow much wiser in the afternoon. allthat he gained in return for his sixpenny omnibus ride, was a more vividconviction that there never was, never could be, any one like margaret;that she did not love him and never would; but that she--no! nor thewhole world--should never hinder him from loving her. and so hereturned to the little market-place, and remounted the omnibus to returnto milton.
　　it was late in the afternoon when he was set down, near his warehouse.
　　the accustomed places brought back the accustomed habits and trains
　　of thought. he knew how much he had to do--more than his usual work,owing to the commotion of the day before. he had to see his brothermagistrates; he had to complete the arrangements, only half made in themorning, for the comfortand safety of his newly imported irish hands;he had to secure them from all chance of communication with thediscontented work-people of milton. last of all, he had to go home andencounter his mother.
　　mrs. thornton had sat in the dining-room all day, every momentexpecting the news of her son\"s acceptance by miss hale. she hadbraced herself up many and many a time, at some sudden noise in thehouse; had caught up the half-dropped work, and begun to ply herneedle diligently, though through dimmed spectacles, and with anunsteady hand! and many times had the door opened, and someindifferent person entered on some insignificant errand. then her rigidface unstiffened from its gray frost-bound expression, and the featuresdropped into the relaxed look of despondency, so unusual to theirsternness. she wrenched herself away from the contemplation of all thedreary changes that would be brought about to herself by her son\"smarriage; she forced her thoughts into the accustomed householdgrooves. the newly-married couple-to-be would need fresh householdstocks of linen; and mrs. thornton had clothes-basket upon clothes-basket, full of table-cloths and napkins, brought in, and began to reckonup the store. there was some confusion between what was hers, andconsequently marked g. h. t. (for george and hannah thornton), andwhat was her son\"s--bought with his money, marked with his initials.




第87章 CHAPTER I MOTHER AND SON(2)


　　some of those marked g. h. t. were dutch damask of the old kind,exquisitely fine; none were like them now. mrs. thornton stood lookingat them long,--they had been her pride when she was first married. thenshe knit her brows, and pinched and compressed her lips tight, andcarefully unpicked the g. h. she went so far as to search for the turkey-red marking-thread to put in the new initials; but it was all used,--andshe had no heart to send for any more just yet. so she looked fixedly atvacancy; a series of visions passing before her, in all of which her sonwas the principal, the sole object,--her son, her pride, her property. stillhe did not come. doubtless he was with miss hale. the new love wasdisplacing her already from her place as first in his heart. a terrible pain-a pang of vain jealousy--shot through her: she hardly knew whether itwas more physical or mental; but it forced her to sit down. in a moment,she was up again as straight as ever,--a grim smile upon her face for thefirst time that day, ready for the door opening, and the rejoicingtriumphant one, who should never know the sore regret his mother feltat his marriage. in all this, there was little thought enough of the futuredaughter-in-law as an individual. she was to be john\"s wife. to take
　　mrs. thornton\"s place as mistress of the house, was only one of the richconsequences which decked out the supreme glory; all household plentyand comfort, all purple and fine linen, honour, love, obedience, troopsof friends, would all come as naturally as jewels on a king\"s robe, andbe as little thought of for their separate value. to be chosen by john,would separate a kitchen-wench from the rest of the world. and misshale was not so bad. if she had been a milton lass, mrs. thorntonwould have positively liked her. she was pungent, and had taste, andspirit, and flavour in her. true, she was sadly prejudiced, andveryignorant; but that was to be expected from her southern breeding. astrange sort of mortified comparison of fanny with her, went on in mrs.
　　thornton\"s mind; and for once she spoke harshly to her daughter;abused her roundly; and then, as if by way of penance, she took uphenry\"s commentaries, and tried to fix her attention on it, instead ofpursuing the employment she took pride and pleasure in, and continuingher inspection of the table-linen.
　　his step at last! she heard him, even while she thought she wasfinishing a sentence; while her eye did pass over it, and her memorycould mechanically have repeated it word for word, she heard him comein at the hall-door. her quickened sense could interpret every sound ofmotion: now he was at the hat-stand--now at the very room-door. whydid he pause? let her know the worst.
　　yet her head was down over the book; she did not look up. he cameclose to the table, and stood still there, waiting till she should havefinished the paragraph which apparently absorbed her. by an effort shelooked up. well, john?\"
　　he knew what that little speech meant. but he had steeled himself. helonged to reply with a jest; the bitterness of his heart could have utteredone, but his mother deserved better of him. he came round behind her,so that she could not see his looks, and, bending back her gray, stonyface, he kissed it, murmuring:
　　\"no one loves me,--no one cares for me, but you, mother.\"
　　he turned away and stood leaning his head against the mantel-piece,tears forcing themselves into his manly eyes. she stood up,--shetottered. for the first time in her life, the strong woman tottered. she puther hands on his shoulders; she was a tall woman. she looked into hisface; she made him look at her.
　　\"mother\"s love is given by god, john. it holds fast for ever and ever. agirl\"s love is like a puff of smoke,--it changes with every wind. and shewould not have you, my own lad, would not she?\" she set her teeth; sheshowed them like a dog for the whole length of her mouth. he shookhis head.
　　\"i am not fit for her, mother; i knew i was not.\"
　　she ground out words between her closed teeth. he could not hear whatshe said; but the look in her eyes interpreted it to be a curse,--if not ascoarsely worded, as fell in intent as ever was uttered. and yet her heartleapt up light, to know he was her own again.
　　\"mother!\" said he, hurriedly, \"i cannot hear a word against her. spare me,-spare me! i am very weak in my sore heart;--i love her yet; i love hermore than ever.\"
　　\"and i hate her,\" said mrs. thornton, in a low fierce voice. \"i tried not tohate her, when she stood between you and me, because,--i said tomyself,--she will make him happy; and i would give my heart\"s blood todo that. but now, i hate her for your misery\"s sake. yes, john, it\"s no usehiding up your aching heart from me. i am the mother that bore you,and your sorrow is my agony; and if you don\"t hate her, i do.\"
　　\"then, mother, you make me love her more. she is unjustly treated byyou, and i must make the balance even. but why do we talk of love orhatred? she does not care for me, and that is enough,--too much. let usnever name the subject again. it is the only thing you can do for me inthe matter. let us never name her.\"
　　\"with all my heart. i only wish that she, and all belonging to her, wereswept back to the place they came from.\"
　　he stood still, gazing into the fire for a minute or two longer. her drydim eyes filled with unwonted tears as she looked at him; but sheseemed just as grim and quiet as usual when he next spoke.
　　\"warrants are out against three men for conspiracy, mother. the riotyesterday helped to knock up the strike.\"
　　and margaret\"s name was no more mentioned between mrs. thorntonand her son. they fell back into their usual mode of talk,--about facts,not opinions, far less feelings. their voices and tones were calm andcold a stranger might have gone away and thought that he had neverseen such frigid indifference of demeanour between such near relations.




第88章 CHAPTER II FRUIT-PIECE(1)


　　\"for never any thing can be amisswhen simpleness and duty tender it.\"
　　midsummer night\"s dream.
　　mr. thornton went straight and clear into all the interests of thefollowing day. there was a slight demand for finished goods; and as itaffected his branch of the trade, he took advantage of it, and drove hardbargains. he was sharp to the hour at the meeting of his brothermagistrates,--giving them the best assistance of his strong sense, and hispower of seeing consequences at a glance, and so coming to a rapiddecision. older men, men of long standing in the town, men of fargreater wealth--realised and turned into land, while his was all floatingcapital, engaged in his trade--looked to him for prompt, ready wisdom.
　　he was the one deputed to see and arrange with the police--to lead in allthe requisite steps. and he cared for their unconscious deference nomore than for the soft west wind, that scarcely made the smoke from thegreat tall chimneys swerve in its straight upward course. he was notaware of the silent respect paid to him. if it had been otherwise, hewould have felt it as an obstacle in his progress to the object he had inview. as it was, he looked to the speedy accomplishment of that alone.
　　it was his mother\"s greedy ears that sucked in, from the women-kind ofthese magistrates and wealthy men, how highly mr. this or mr. thatthought of mr. thornton; that if he had not been there, things wouldhave gone on very differently,--very badly, indeed. he swept off hisbusiness right and left that day. it seemed as though his deepmortification of yesterday, and the stunned purposeless course of thehours afterwards, had cleared away all the mists from his intellect. hefelt his power and revelled in it. he could almost defy his heart. if hehad known it, he could have sang the song of the miller who lived bythe river dee:-\"
　　i care for nobody-nobodycares for me.\"
　　the evidence against boucher, and other ringleaders of the riot, wastaken before him; that against the three others, for conspiracy, failed.
　　but he sternly charged the police to be on the watch; for the swift rightarm of the law should be in readiness to strike, as soon as they couldprove a fault. and then he left the hot reeking room in the boroughcourt, and went out into the fresher, but still sultry street. it seemed asthough he gave way all at once; he was so languid that he could notcontrol his thoughts; they would wander to her; they would bring backthe scene,--not of his repulse and rejection the day before but the looks,the actions of the day before that. he went along the crowded streetsmechanically, winding in and out among the people, but never seeingthem,--almost sick with longing for that one half-hour--that one briefspace of time when she clung to him, and her heart beat against his--to
　　come once again.
　　\"why, mr. thornton you\"re cutting me very coolly, i must say. and howis mrs. thornton? brave weather this! we doctors don\"t like it, i can tellyou!\"
　　\"i beg your pardon, dr. donaldson. i really didn\"t see you. my mother\"squite well, thank you. it is a fine day, and good for the harvest, i hope.
　　if the wheat is well got in, we shall have a brisk trade next year,whatever you doctors have.\"
　　\"ay, ay. each man for himself your bad weather, and your bad times,are my good ones. when trade is bad, there\"s more undermining ofhealth, and preparation for death, going on among you milton men thanyou\"re aware of.\"
　　\"not with me, doctor. i\"m made of iron. the news of the worst bad debti ever had, never made my pulse vary. this strike, which affects memore than any one else in milton,--more than hamper,--never comesnear my appetite. you must go elsewhere for a patient, doctor.\"
　　\"by the way, you\"ve recommended me a good patient, poor lady! not togo on talking in this heartless way, i seriously believe that mrs. hale-thatlady in crampton, you know--hasn\"t many weeks to live. i neverhad any hope of cure, as i think i told you; but i\"ve been seeing her today,and i think very badly of her.\"
　　mr. thornton was silent. the vaunted steadiness of pulse failed him foran instant.
　　\"can i do anything, doctor?\" he asked, in an altered voice. \"you know-youwould see, that money is not very plentiful; are there any comfortsor dainties she ought to have?\"
　　\"no,\" replied the doctor, shaking his head. \"she craves for fruit,--she hasa constant fever on her; but jargonelle pears will do as well as anything,and there are quantities of them in the market.\"
　　\"you will tell me, if there is anything i can do, i\"m sure, replied mr.
　　thornton. \"i rely upon you.\"
　　\"oh! never fear! i\"ll not spare your purse,--i know it\"s deep enough. iwish you\"d give me carte-blanche for all my patients, and all theirwants.\"
　　but mr. thornton had no general benevolence,--no universalphilanthropy; few even would have given him credit for strongaffections. but he went straight to the first fruit-shop in milton, andchose out the bunch of purple grapes with the most delicate bloom uponthem,--the richest-coloured peaches,--the freshest vine-leaves. theywere packed into a basket, and the shopman awaited the answer to hisinquiry, \"where shall we send them to, sir?\"
　　there was no reply. \"to marlborough mills, i suppose, sir?\"
　　\"no!\" mr. thornton said. \"give the basket to me,--i\"ll take it.\"
　　it took up both his hands to carry it; and he had to pass through thebusiest part of the town for feminine shopping. many a young lady ofhis acquaintance turned to look after him, and thought it strange to seehim occupied just like a porter or an errand-boy.
　　he was thinking, \"i will not be daunted from doing as i choose by thethought of her. i like to take this fruit to the poor mother, and it issimply right that i should. she shall never scorn me out of doing what iplease. a pretty joke, indeed, if, for fear of a haughty girl, i failed indoing a kindness to a man i liked i do it for mr. hale; i do it in defianceof her.\"
wwＷ．lzuｏwen.com  www.7wenxＵe.com



第89章 CHAPTER II FRUIT-PIECE(2)


　　he went at an unusual pace, and was soon at crampton. he wentupstairs two steps at a time, and entered the drawing-room before dixoncould announce him,--his face flushed, his eyes shining with kindlyearnestness. mrs. hale lay on the sofa, heated with fever. mr. hale wasreading aloud. margaret was working on a low stool by her mother\"sside. her heart fluttered, if his did not, at this interview. but he took nonotice of her, hardly of mr. hale himself; he went up straight with hisbasket to mrs. hale, and said, in that subdued and gentle tone, which isso touching when used by a robust man in full health, speaking to afeeble invalid-\"
　　i met dr. donaldson, ma\"am, and as he said fruit would be good foryou, i have taken the liberty--the great liberty of bringing you some thatseemed to me fine.\" mrs. hale was excessively surprised; excessivelypleased; quite in a tremble of eagerness. mr. hale with fewer wordsexpressed a deeper gratitude.
　　\"fetch a plate, margaret--a basket--anything.\" margaret stood up by thetable, half afraid of moving or making any noise to arouse mr. thorntoninto a consciousness of her being in the room. she thought it would beawkward for both to be brought into conscious collision; and fanciedthat, from her being on a low seat at first, and now standing behind herfather, he had overlooked her in his haste. as if he did not feel theconsciousness of her presence all over, though his eyes had never restedon her!
　　\"i must go,\" said he, \"i cannot stay. if you will forgive this liberty,--myrough ways,--too abrupt, i fear--but i will be more gentle next time.
　　you will allow me the pleasure of bringing you some fruit again, if ishould see any that is tempting. good afternoon, mr. hale. good-bye,ma\"am.\"
　　he was gone. not one word: not one look to margaret. she believedthat he had not seen her. she went for a plate in silence, and lifted thefruit out tenderly, with the points of her delicate taper fingers. it wasgood of him to bring it; and after yesterday too!
　　\"oh! it is so delicious!\" said mrs. hale, in a feeble voice. \"how kind of
　　him to think of me! margaret love, only taste these grapes! was it notgood of him?\"
　　\"yes!\" said margaret, quietly.
　　\"margaret!\" said mrs. hale, rather querulously, \"you won\"t like anythingmr. thornton does. i never saw anybody so prejudiced.\"
　　mr. hale had been peeling a peach for his wife; and, cutting off a smallpiece for himself, he said:
　　\"if i had any prejudices, the gift of such delicious fruit as this wouldmelt them all away. i have not tasted such fruit--no! not even inhampshire--since i was a boy; and to boys, i fancy, all fruit is good. iremember eating sloes and crabs with a relish. do you remember thematted-up currant bushes, margaret, at the corner of the west-wall in thegarden at home?\"
　　did she not? did she not remember every weather-stain on the old stonewall; the gray and yellow lichens that marked it like a map; the littlecrane\"s-bill that grew in the crevices? she had been shaken by theevents of the last two days; her whole life just now was a strain uponher fortitude; and, somehow, these careless words of her father\"s,touching on the remembrance of the sunny times of old, made her startup, and, dropping her sewing on the ground, she went hastily out of theroom into her own little chamber. she had hardly given way to the firstchoking sob, when she became aware of dixon standing at her drawers,and evidently searching for something.
　　\"bless me, miss! how you startled me! missus is not worse, is she? isanything the matter?\"
　　\"no, nothing. only i\"m silly, dixon, and want a glass of water. what areyou looking for? i keep my muslins in that drawer.\"
　　dixon did not speak, but went on rummaging. the scent of lavendercame out and perfumed the room.
　　at last dixon found what she wanted; what it was margaret could notsee. dixon faced round, and spoke to her:
　　\"now i don\"t like telling you what i wanted, because you\"ve frettingenough to go through, and i know you\"ll fret about this. i meant to havekept it from you till night, may be, or such times as that.\"
　　\"what is the matter? pray, tell me, dixon, at once.\"
　　\"that young woman you go to see--higgins, i mean.\"
　　\"well?\"
　　\"well! she died this morning, and her sister is here--come to beg astrange thing. it seems, the young woman who died had a fancy forbeing buried in something of yours, and so the sister\"s come to ask forit,--and i was looking for a night-cap that wasn\"t too good to give away.\"
　　\"oh! let me find one,\" said margaret, in the midst of her tears. \"poorbessy! i never thought i should not see her again.\"
　　\"why, that\"s another thing. this girl down-stairs wanted me to ask you,if you would like to see her.\"
　　\"but she\"s dead!\" said margaret, turning a little pale. \"i never saw a deadperson. no! i would rather not.\"
　　\"i should never have asked you, if you hadn\"t come in. i told her youwouldn\"t.\"
　　\"i will go down and speak to her,\" said margaret, afraid lest dixon\"sharshness of manner might wound the poor girl. so, taking the cap inher hand, she went to the kitchen. mary\"s face was all swollen withcrying, and she burst out afresh when she saw margaret.
　　\"oh, ma\"am, she loved yo\", she loved yo\", she did indeed!\" and for a longtime, margaret could not get her to say anything more than this. at last,her sympathy, and dixon\"s scolding, forced out a few facts. nicholashiggins had gone out in the morning, leaving bessy as well as on theday before. but in an hour she was taken worse; some neighbour ran tothe room where mary was working; they did not know where to findher father; mary had only come in a few minutes before she died.
　　\"it were a day or two ago she axed to be buried in somewhat o\" yourn.
　　she were never tired o\" talking o\" yo\". she used to say yo\" were theprettiest thing she\"d ever clapped eyes on. she loved yo\" dearly her lastwords were, \"give her my affectionate respects; and keep father fro\"
　　drink.\" yo\"ll come and see her, ma\"am. she would ha\" thought it a greatcompliment, i know.\"
　　margaret shrank a little from answering.
　　\"yes, perhaps i may. yes, i will. i\"ll come before tea. but where\"s yourfather, mary?\"
　　mary shook her head, and stood up to be going.
　　\"miss hale,\" said dixon, in a low voice, \"where\"s the use o\" your going tosee the poor thing laid out? i\"d never say a word against it, if it could dothe girl any good; and i wouldn\"t mind a bit going myself, if that wouldsatisfy her. they\"ve just a notion, these common folks, of its being arespect to the departed. here,\" said she, turning sharply round, \"i\"ll comeand see your sister. miss hale is busy, and she can\"t come, or else shewould.\"
　　the girl looked wistfully at margaret. dixon\"s coming might be acompliment, but it was not the same thing to the poor sister, who hadhad her little pangs of jealousy, during bessy\"s lifetime, at the intimacybetween her and the young lady.
　　\"no, dixon!\" said margaret with decision. \"i will go. mary, you shall seeme this afternoon.\" and for fear of her own cowardice, she went away,in order to take from herself any chance of changing her determination.
www.xiabook.com下~书~网



第90章 CHAPTER III COMFORT IN SORROW (1)


　　\"through cross to crown!--and though thy spirit\"s lifetrials untold assail with giant strength,good cheer! good cheer! soon ends the bitter strife,and thou shalt reign in peace with christ at length.\"
　　kosegarten.
　　\"ay sooth, we feel too strong in weal, to need thee on that road;butwoe being come, the soul is dumb, that crieth not on \"god.\"\"mrs.
　　browning.that afternoon she walked swiftly to the higgins\"s house.
　　mary was looking out for her, with a half-distrustful face. margaretsmiled into her eyes to re-assure her. they passed quickly through thehouse-place, upstairs, and into the quiet presence of the dead. thenmargaret was glad that she had come. the face, often so weary withpain, so restless with troublous thoughts, had now the faint soft smile ofeternal rest upon it. the slow tears gathered into margaret\"s eyes, but adeep calm entered into her soul. and that was death! it looked morepeaceful than life. all beautiful scriptures came into her mind. \"theyrest from their labours.\" \"the weary are at rest.\" \"he giveth his belovedsleep.\"
　　slowly, slowly margaret turned away from the bed. mary was humblysobbing in the back-ground. they went down stairs without a word.
　　resting his hand upon the house-table, nicholas higgins stood in themidst of the floor; his great eyes startled open by the news he hadheard, as he came along the court, from many busy tongues. his eyeswere dry and fierce; studying the reality of her death; bringing himselfto understand that her place should know her no more. for she had beensickly, dying so long, that he had persuaded himself she would not die;that she would \"pull through.\"
　　margaret felt as if she had no business to be there, familiarlyacquainting herself with the surroundings of death which he, the father,had only just learnt. there had been a pause of an instant on the steepcrooked stair, when she first saw him; but now she tried to steal past his
　　abstracted gaze, and to leave him in the solemn circle of his householdmisery.
　　mary sat down on the first chair she came to, and throwing her apronover her head, began to cry.
　　the noise appeared to rouse him. he took sudden hold of margaret\"sarm, and held her till he could gather words to speak. seemed dry; theycame up thick, and choked, and hoarse:
　　\"were yo\" with her? did yo\" see her die?\"
　　\"no!\" replied margaret, standing still with the utmost patience, now shefound herself perceived. it was some time before he spoke again, but hekept his hold on her arm.
　　\"all men must die,\" said he at last, with a strange sort of gravity, whichfirst suggested to margaret the idea that he had been drinking--notenough to intoxicate himself, but enough to make his thoughtsbewildered. \"but she were younger than me.\" still he pondered over theevent, not looking at margaret, though he grasped her tight. suddenly,he looked up at her with a wild searching inquiry in his glance. \"yo\"resure and certain she\"s dead--not in a dwam, a faint?--she\"s been sobefore, often.\"
　　\"she is dead,\" replied margaret. she felt no fear in speaking to him,though he hurt her arm with his gripe, and wild gleams came across thestupidity of his eyes.
　　\"she is dead!\" she said.
　　he looked at her still with that searching look, which seemed to fadeout of his eyes as he gazed. then he suddenly let go his hold ofmargaret, and, throwing his body half across the table, he shook it andevery piece of furniture in the room, with his violent sobs. mary cametrembling towards him.
　　\"get thee gone!--get thee gone!\" he cried, striking wildly and blindly ather. \"what do i care for thee?\" margaret took her hand, and held it softlyin hers. he tore his hair, he beat his head against the hard wood, then helay exhausted and stupid. still his daughter and margaret did not move.
　　mary trembled from head to foot.
　　at last--it might have been a quarter of an hour, it might have been anhour--he lifted himself up. his eyes were swollen and bloodshot, and heseemed to have forgotten that any one was by; he scowled at thewatchers when he saw them. he shook himself heavily, gave them onemore sullen look, spoke never a word, but made for the door.
　　\"oh, father, father!\" said mary, throwing herself upon his arm,--\"not tonight!
　　any night but to-night. oh, help me! he\"s going out to drinkagain! father, i\"ll not leave yo\". yo\" may strike, but i\"ll not leave yo\". shetold me last of all to keep yo\" fro\" drink!\"
　　but margaret stood in the doorway, silent yet commanding. he looked
　　up at her defyingly.
　　\"it\"s my own house. stand out o\" the way, wench, or i\"ll make yo\"!\" hehad shaken off mary with violence; he looked ready to strike margaret.
　　but she never moved a feature--never took her deep, serious eyes offhim. he stared back on her with gloomy fierceness. if she had stirredhand or foot, he would have thrust her aside with even more violencethan he had used to his own daughter, whose face was bleeding fromher fall against a chair.
　　\"what are yo\" looking at me in that way for?\" asked he at last, dauntedand awed by her severe calm. \"if yo\" think for to keep me from goingwhat gait i choose, because she loved yo\"--and in my own house, too,where i never asked yo\" to come, yo\"re mista\"en. it\"s very hard upon aman that he can\"t go to the only comfort left.\"
　　margaret felt that he acknowledged her power. what could she do next?
　　he had seated himself on a chair, close to the door; half-conquered, half-resenting; intending to go out as soon as she left her position, butunwilling to use the violence he had threatened not five minutes before.
　　margaret laid her hand on his arm.
　　\"come with me,\" she said. \"come and see her!\"
　　the voice in which she spoke was very low and solemn; but there wasno fear or doubt expressed in it, either of him or of his compliance. hesullenly rose up. he stood uncertain, with dogged irresolution upon hisface. she waited him there; quietly and patiently waited for his time tomove. he had a strange pleasure in making her wait; but at last hemoved towards the stairs.
　　she and he stood by the corpse.
　　\"her last words to mary were, \"keep my father fro\" drink.\"\"
 



第91章 CHAPTER III COMFORT IN SORROW (2)


　　\"it canna hurt her now,\" muttered he. \"nought can hurt her now.\" then,raising his voice to a wailing cry, he went on: \"we may quarrel and fallout--we may make peace and be friends--we may clem to skin and bone-and nought o\" all our griefs will ever touch her more. hoo\"s had herportion on \"em. what wi\" hard work first, and sickness at last, hoo\"s ledthe life of a dog. and to die without knowing one good piece o\"
　　rejoicing in all her days! nay, wench, whatever hoo said, hoo can knownought about it now, and i mun ha\" a sup o\" drink just to steady meagain sorrow.\"
　　\"no,\" said margaret, softening with his softened manner. \"you shall not.
　　if her life has been what you say, at any rate she did not fear death assome do. oh, you should have heard her speak of the life to come--thelife hidden with god, that she is now gone to.\"
　　he shook his head, glancing sideways up at margaret as he did so. hispale, haggard face struck her painfully.
　　\"you are sorely tired. where have you been all day--not at work?\"
　　\"not at work, sure enough,\" said he, with a short, grim laugh. \"not atwhat you call work. i were at the committee, till i were sickened out wi\"
　　trying to make fools hear reason. i were fetched to boucher\"s wife aforeseven this morning. she\"s bed-fast, but she were raving and raging toknow where her dunder-headed brute of a chap was, as if i\"d to keephim--as if he were fit to be ruled by me. the d--d fool, who has put hisfoot in all our plans! and i\"ve walked my feet sore wi\" going about forto see men who wouldn\"t be seen, now the law is raised again us. and iwere sore-hearted, too, which is worse than sore-footed; and if i did seea friend who ossed to treat me, i never knew hoo lay a-dying here. bess,lass, thou\"d believe me, thou wouldst--wouldstn\"t thou?\" turning to thepoor dumb form with wild appeal.
　　\"i am sure,\" said margaret, \"i am sure you did not know: it was quitesudden. but now, you see, it would be different; you do know; you dosee her lying there; you hear what she said with her last breath. youwill not go?\"
　　no answer. in fact, where was he to look for comfort?
　　\"come home with me,\" said she at last, with a bold venture, halftrembling at her own proposal as she made it. \"at least you shall havesome comfortable food, which i\"m sure you need.\"
　　\"yo\"r father\"s a parson?\" asked he, with a sudden turn in his ideas.
　　\"he was,\" said margaret, shortly.
　　\"i\"ll go and take a dish o\" tea with him, since yo\"ve asked me. i\"ve many athing i often wished to say to a parson, and i\"m not particular as towhether he\"s preaching now, or not.\"
　　margaret was perplexed; his drinking tea with her father, who would betotally unprepared for his visitor--her mother so ill--seemed utterly outof the question; and yet if she drew back now, it would be worse thanever--sure to drive him to the gin-shop. she thought that if she couldonly get him to their own house, it was so great a step gained that shewould trust to the chapter ofaccidents for the next.
　　\"goodbye, ou\"d wench! we\"ve parted company at last, we have! butthou\"st been a blessin\" to thy father ever sin\" thou wert born. bless thywhite lips, lass,--they\"ve a smile on \"em now! and i\"m glad to see it onceagain, though i\"m lone and forlorn for evermore.\"
　　he stooped down and fondly kissed his daughter; covered up her face,and turned to follow margaret. she had hastily gone down stairs to tellmary of the arrangement; to say it was the only way she could think ofto keep him from the gin-palace; to urge mary to come too, for herheart smote her at the idea of leaving the poor affectionate girl alone.
　　but mary had friends among the neighbours, she said, who would comein and sit a bit with her, it was all right; but father-hewas there by them as she would have spoken more. he had shaken
　　off his emotion, as if he was ashamed of having ever given way to it;and had even o\"erleaped himself so much that he assumed a sort ofbitter mirth, like the crackling of thorns under a pot.
　　\"i\"m going to take my tea wi\" her father, i am!\"
　　but he slouched his cap low down over his brow as he went out into thestreet, and looked neither to the right nor to the left, while he trampedalong by margaret\"s side; he feared being upset by the words, still morethe looks, of sympathising neighbours. so he and margaret walked insilence.
　　as he got near the street in which he knew she lived, he looked down athis clothes, his hands, and shoes.
　　\"i should m\"appen ha\" cleaned mysel\", first?\"
　　it certainly would have been desirable, but margaret assured him heshould be allowed to go into the yard, and have soap and towelprovided; she could not let him slip out of her hands just then.
　　while he followed the house-servant along the passage, and through thekitchen, stepping cautiously on every dark mark in the pattern of the oilcloth,in order to conceal his dirty foot-prints, margaret ran upstairs.
　　she met dixon on the landing.
　　\"how is mamma?--where is papa?\"
　　missus was tired, and gone into her own room. she had wanted to go tobed, but dixon had persuaded her to lie down on the sofa, and have hertea brought to her there; it would be better than getting restless by beingtoo long in bed.
　　so far, so good. but where was mr. hale? in the drawing-room.
　　margaret went in half breathless with the hurried story she had to tell.
　　of course, she told it incompletely; and her father was rather \"takenaback\" by the idea of the drunken weaver awaiting him in his quietstudy, with whom he was expected to drink tea, and on whose behalfmargaret was anxiously pleading. the meek, kind-hearted mr. halewould have readily tried to console him in his grief, but, unluckily, thepoint margaret dwelt upon most forcibly was the fact of his having beendrinking, and her having brought him home with her as a last expedientto keep him from the gin-shop. one little event had come out of anotherso naturally that margaret was hardly conscious of what she had done,till she saw the slight look of repugnance on her father\"s face.
　　\"oh, papa! he really is a man you will not dislike--if you won\"t beshocked to begin with.\"
　　\"but, margaret, to bring a drunken man home--and your mother so ill!\"
　　margaret\"s countenance fell. \"i am sorry, papa. he is very quiet--he isnot tipsy at all. he was only rather strange at first, but that might be theshock of poor bessy\"s death.\" margaret\"s eyes filled with tears. mr. haletook hold of her sweet pleading face in both his hands, and kissed her
　　forehead.
www.xiabook.com下{书}网



第92章 CHAPTER III COMFORT IN SORROW (3)


　　\"it is all right, dear. i\"ll go and make him as comfortable as i can, and doyou attend to your mother. only, if you can come in and make a third inthe study, i shall be glad.\"
　　\"oh, yes--thank you.\" but as mr. hale was leaving the room, she ranafter him:
　　\"papa--you must not wonder at what he says: he\"s an----i mean he doesnot believe in much of what we do.\"
　　\"oh dear! a drunken infidel weaver!\" said mr. hale to himself, indismay. but to margaret he only said, \"if your mother goes to sleep, besure you come directly.\"
　　margaret went into her mother\"s room. mrs. hale lifted herself up froma doze.
　　\"when did you write to frederick, margaret? yesterday, or the daybefore?\"
　　\"yesterday, mamma.\"
　　\"yesterday. and the letter went?\"
　　\"yes. i took it myself\"
　　\"oh, margaret, i\"m so afraid of his coming! if he should be recognised!
　　if he should be taken! if he should be executed, after all these years thathe has kept away and lived in safety! i keep falling asleep and dreamingthat he is caught and being tried.\"
　　\"oh, mamma, don\"t be afraid. there will be some risk no doubt; but wewill lessen it as much as ever we can. and it is so little! now, if wewere at helstone, there would be twenty--a hundred times as much.
　　there, everybody would remember him and if there was a strangerknown to be in the house, they would be sure to guess it was frederick;while here, nobody knows or cares for us enough to notice what we do.
　　dixon will keep the door like a dragon--won\"t you, dixon--while he ishere?\"
　　\"they\"ll be clever if they come in past me!\" said dixon, showing herteeth at the bare idea.
　　\"and he need not go out, except in the dusk, poor fellow!\"
　　\"poor fellow!\" echoed mrs. hale. \"but i almost wish you had not written.
　　would it be too late to stop him if you wrote again, margaret?\"
　　\"i\"m afraid it would, mamma,\" said margaret, remembering the urgencywith which she had entreated him to come directly, if he wished to seehis mother alive.
　　\"i always dislike that doing things in such a hurry,\" said mrs. hale.
　　margaret was silent.
　　\"come now, ma am,\" said dixon, with a kind of cheerful authority, \"youknow seeing master frederick is just the very thing of all others you\"relonging for. and i\"m glad miss margaret wrote off straight, without
　　shilly-shallying. i\"ve had a great mind to do it myself. and we\"ll keephim snug, depend upon it. there\"s only martha in the house that wouldnot do a good deal to save him on a pinch; and i\"ve been thinking shemight go and see her mother just at that very time. she\"s been sayingonce or twice she should like to go, for her mother has had a strokesince she came here, only she didn\"t like to ask. but i\"ll see about herbeing safe off, as soon as we know when he comes, god bless him! sotake your tea, ma\"am, in comfort, and trust to me.\"
　　mrs. hale did trust in dixon more than in margaret. dixon\"s wordsquieted her for the time. margaret poured out the tea in silence, tryingto think of something agreeable to say; but her thoughts made answersomething like daniel o\"rourke, when the man-in-the-moon asked himto get off his reaping-hook. \"the more you ax us, the more we won\"tstir.\" the more she tried to think of something anything besides thedanger to which frederick would be exposed--the more closely herimagination clung to the unfortunate idea presented to her. her motherprattled with dixon, and seemed to have utterly forgotten the possibilityof frederick being tried and executed--utterly forgotten that at her wish,if by margaret\"s deed, he was summoned into this danger. her motherwas one of those who throw out terrible possibilities, miserableprobabilities, unfortunate chances of all kinds, as a rocket throws outsparks; but if the sparks light on some combustible matter, theysmoulder first, and burst out into a frightful flame at last. margaret wasglad when, her filial duties gently and carefully performed, she could godown into the study. she wondered how her father and higgins had goton.
　　in the first place, the decorous, kind-hearted, simple, old-fashionedgentleman, had unconsciously called out, by his own refinement andcourteousness of manner, all the latent courtesy in the other.
　　mr. hale treated all his fellow-creatures alike: it never entered into hishead to make any difference because of their rank. he placed a chair fornicholas stood up till he, at mr. hale\"s request, took a seat; and calledhim, invariably, \"mr. higgins,\" instead of the curt \"nicholas\" or \"higgins,\"
　　to which the \"drunken infidel weaver\" had been accustomed. butnicholas was neither an habitual drunkard nor a thorough infidel. hedrank to drown care, as he would have himself expressed it: and he wasinfidel so far as he had never yet found any form of faith to which hecould attach himself, heart and soul.
　　margaret was a little surprised, and very much pleased, when she foundher father and higgins in earnest conversation--each speaking withgentle politeness to the other, however their opinions might clash.
　　nicholas--clean, tidied (if only at the pump-trough), and quiet spoken-wasa new creature to her, who had only seen him in the rough
　　independence of his own hearthstone. he had \"slicked\" his hair downwith the fresh water; he had adjusted his neck-handkerchief, andborrowed an odd candle-end to polish his clogs with and there he sat,enforcing some opinion on her father, with a strong darkshire accent, itis true, but with a lowered voice, and a good, earnest composure on hisface. her father, too, was interested in what his companion was saying.
　　he looked round as she came in, smiled, and quietly gave her his chair,and then sat down afresh as quickly as possible, and with a little bow ofapology to his guest for the interruption. higgins nodded to her as asign of greeting; and she softly adjusted her working materials on thetable, and prepared to listen.




第93章 CHAPTER III COMFORT IN SORROW (4)


　　\"as i was a-sayin, sir, i reckon yo\"d not ha\" much belief in yo\" if yo\" livedhere,--if yo\"d been bred here. i ax your pardon if i use wrong words; butwhat i mean by belief just now, is a-thinking on sayings and maximsand promises made by folk yo\" never saw, about the things and the life,yo\" never saw, nor no one else. now, yo\" say these are true things, andtrue sayings, and a true life. i just say, where\"s the proof? there\"s manyand many a one wiser, and scores better learned than i am around me,-folkwho\"ve had time to think on these things,--while my time has hadto be gi\"en up to getting my bread. well, i sees these people. their livesis pretty much open to me. they\"re real folk. they don\"t believe i\" thebible,--not they. they may say they do, for form\"s sake; but lord, sir,d\"ye think their first cry i\" th\" morning is, \"what shall i do to get hold oneternal life?\" or \"what shall i do to fill my purse this blessed day?
　　where shall i go? what bargains shall i strike?\" the purse and the goldand the notes is real things; things as can be felt and touched; them\"srealities; and eternal life is all a talk, very fit for--i ax your pardon, sir;yo\"r a parson out o\" work, i believe. well! i\"ll never speak disrespectfulof a man in the same fix as i\"m in mysel\". but i\"ll just ax yo anotherquestion, sir, and i dunnot want yo to answer it, only to put in yo\"r pipe,and smoke it, afore yo\" go for to set down us, who only believe in whatwe see, as fools and noddies. if salvation, and life to come, and whatnot, was true--not in men\"s words, but in men\"s hearts\" core--dun yo\" notthink they\"d din us wi\" it as they do wi\" political \"conomy? they\"remighty anxious to come round us wi\" that piece o\" wisdom; but t\"otherwould be a greater convarsion, if it were true.\"
　　\"but the masters have nothing to do with your religion. all that they areconnected with you in is trade,--so they think,--and all that it concernsthem, therefore, to rectify your opinions in is the science of trade.\"
　　\"i\"m glad, sir,\" said higgins, with a curious wink of his eye, \"that yo\" putin, \"so they think.\" i\"d ha\" thought yo\" a hypocrite, i\"m afeard, if yo\"
　　hadn\"t, for all yo\"r a parson, or rayther because yo\"r a parson. yo\" see, ifyo\"d spoken o\" religion as a thing that, if it was true, it didn\"t concern all
　　men to press on all men\"s attention, above everything else in this \"varsalearth, i should ha\" thought yo\" a knave for to be a parson; and i\"d ratherthink yo\" a fool than a knave. no offence, i hope, sir.\"
　　\"none at all. you consider me mistaken, and i consider you far morefatally mistaken. i don\"t expect to convince you in a day,--not in oneconversation; but let us know each other, and speak freely to each otherabout these things, and the truth will prevail. i should not believe ingod if i did not believe that. mr. higgins, i trust, whatever else youhave given up, you believe\"--(mr. hale\"s voice dropped low inreverence)--\"you believe in him.\"
　　nicholas higgins suddenly stood straight, stiff up. margaret started toher feet,--for she thought, by the working of his face, he was going intoconvulsions. mr. hale looked at her dismayed. at last higgins foundwords:
　　\"man! i could fell yo\" to the ground for tempting me. whatten businesshave yo\" to try me wi\" your doubts? think o\" her lying theere, after thelife hoo\"s led and think then how yo\"d deny me the one sole comfort left-that there is a god, and that he set her her life. i dunnot believe she\"llever live again,\" said he, sitting down, and drearily going on, as if to theunsympathising fire. \"i dunnot believe in any other life than this, inwhich she dreed such trouble, and had such never-ending care; and icannot bear to think it were all a set o\" chances, that might ha\" beenaltered wi\" a breath o\" wind. there\"s many a time when i\"ve thought ididna believe in god, but i\"ve never put it fair out before me in words,as many men do. i may ha\" laughed at those who did, to brave it out like-but i have looked round at after, to see if he heard me, if so be therewas a he; but to-day, when i\"m left desolate, i wunnot listen to yo\" wi\"
　　yo\"r questions, and yo\"r doubts. there\"s but one thing steady and quiet i\"
　　all this reeling world, and, reason or no reason, i\"ll cling to that. it\"s a\"
　　very well for happy folk\"---margarettouched his arm very softly. she had not spoken before, norhad he heard her rise.
　　\"nicholas, we do not want to reason; you misunderstand my father. wedo not reason--we believe; and so do you. it is the one sole comfort insuch times.\"
　　he turned round and caught her hand. \"ay! it is, it is--(brushing awaythe tears with the back of his hand). --\"but yo\" know, she\"s lying dead athome and i\"m welly dazed wi\" sorrow, and at times i hardly know whati\"m saying. it\"s as if speeches folk ha\" made--clever and smart things asi\"ve thought at the time--come up now my heart\"s welly brossen. th\"
　　strike\"s failed as well; dun yo\" know that, miss? i were coming whoamto ask her, like a beggar as i am, for a bit o\" comfort i\" that trouble; and iwere knocked down by one who telled me she were dead--just dead
　　that were all; but that were enough for me.
　　mr. hale blew his nose, and got up to snuff the candles in order toconceal his emotion. \"he\"s not an infidel, margaret; how could you sayso?\" muttered he reproachfully \"i\"ve a good mind to read him thefourteenth chapter of job.\"
　　\"not yet, papa, i think. perhaps not at all. let us ask him about thestrike, and give him all the sympathy he needs, and hoped to have frompoor bessy.\"
www.xiabook.com。下 书网



第94章 CHAPTER III COMFORT IN SORROW (5)


　　so they questioned and listened. the workmen\"s calculations werebased (like too many of the masters\") on false premises. they reckonedon their fellow-men as if they possessed the calculable powers ofmachines, no more, no less; no allowance for human passions gettingthe better of reason, as in the case of boucher and the rioters; andbelieving that the representations of their injuries would have the sameeffect on strangers far away, as the injuries (fancied or real) had uponthemselves. they were consequently surprised and indignant at the poorirish, who had allowed themselves to be imported and brought over totake their places. this indignation was tempered, in some degree, bycontempt for \"them irishers,\" and by pleasure at the idea of the bunglingway in which they would set to work, and perplex their new masterswith their ignorance and stupidity, strange exaggerated stories of whichwere already spreading through the town. but the most cruel cut of allwas that of the milton workmen, who had defied and disobeyed thecommands of the union to keep the peace, whatever came; who hadoriginated discord in the camp, and spread the panic of the law beingarrayed against them.
　　\"and so the strike is at an end,\" said margaret.
　　\"ay, miss. it\"s save as save can. th\" factory doors will need open wide tomorrowto let in all who\"ll be axing for work; if it\"s only just to showthey\"d nought to do wi\" a measure, which if we\"d been made o\" th\" rightstuff would ha\" brought wages up to a point they\"n not been at this tenyear.\"
　　\"you\"ll get work, shan\"t you?\" asked margaret. \"you\"re a famousworkman, are not you?\"
　　\"hamper\"ll let me work at his mill, when he cuts off his right hand--notbefore, and not after,\" said nicholas, quietly. margaret was silenced andsad.
　　\"about the wages,\" said mr. hale. \"you\"ll not be offended, but i thinkyou make some sad mistakes. i should like to read you some remarks ina book i have.\" he got up and went to his book-shelves.
　　\"yo\" needn\"t trouble yoursel\", sir,\" said nicholas. \"their book-stuff goesin at one ear and out at t\"other. i can make nought on\"t. afore hamperand me had this split, th\" overlooker telled him i were stirring up the
　　men to ask for higher wages; and hamper met me one day in th\" yard.
　　he\"d a thin book i\" his hand, and says he, \"higgins, i\"m told you\"re oneof those damned fools that think you can get higher wages for askingfor \"em; ay, and keep \"em up too, when you\"ve forced \"em up. now, i\"llgive yo\" a chance and try if yo\"ve any sense in yo\". here\"s a book writtenby a friend o\" mine, and if yo\"ll read it yo\"ll see how wages find theirown level, without either masters or men having aught to do with them;except the men cut their own throats wi\" striking, like the confoundednoodles they are.\" well, now, sir, i put it to yo\", being a parson, andhaving been in th\" preaching line, and having had to try and bring folko\"er to what yo\" thought was a right way o\" thinking--did yo\" begin bycalling \"em fools and such like, or didn\"t yo\" rayther give \"em some kindwords at first, to make \"em ready for to listen and be convinced, if theycould; and in yo\"r preaching, did yo\" stop every now and then, and say,half to them and half to yo\"rsel\", \"but yo\"re such a pack o\" fools, that i\"vea strong notion it\"s no use my trying to put sense into yo\"?\" i were not i\"
　　th\" best state, i\"ll own, for taking in what hamper\"s friend had to say--iwere so vexed at the way it were put to me;--but i thought, \"come, i\"llsee what these chaps has got to say, and try if it\"s them or me as is th\"
　　noodle.\" so i took th\" book and tugged at it; but, lord bless yo\", it wenton about capital and labour, and labour and capital, till it fair sent meoff to sleep. i ne\"er could rightly fix i\" my mind which was which; and itspoke on \"em as if they was vartues or vices; and what i wanted for toknow were the rights o\" men, whether they were rich or poor--so be theyonly were men.\"
　　\"but for all that,\" said mr. hale, \"and granting to the full theoffensiveness, the folly, the unchristianness of mr. hamper\"s way ofspeaking to you in recommending his friend\"s book, yet if it told youwhat he said it did, that wages find their own level, and that the mostsuccessful strike can only force them up for a moment, to sink in fargreater proportion afterwards, in consequence of that very strike, thebook would have told you the truth.\"
　　\"well, sir,\" said higgins, rather doggedly; \"it might, or it might not.
　　there\"s two opinions go to settling that point. but suppose it was truthdouble strong, it were no truth to me if i couldna take it in. i daresaythere\"s truth in yon latin book on your shelves; but it\"s gibberish andnot truth to me, unless i know the meaning o\" the words. if yo\", sir, orany other knowledgable, patient man come to me, and says he\"ll larn mewhat the words mean, and not blow me up if i\"m a bit stupid, or forgethow one thing hangs on another--why, in time i may get to see the truthof it; or i may not. i\"ll not be bound to say i shall end in thinking thesame as any man. and i\"m not one who think truth can be shaped out inwords, all neat and clean, as th\" men at th\" foundry cut out sheet-iron.
　　same bones won\"t go down wi\" every one. it\"ll stick here i\" this man\"sthroat, and there i\" t\"other\"s. let alone that, when down, it may be toostrong for this one, too weak for that. folk who sets up to doctor th\"
　　world wi\" their truth, mun suit different for different minds; and be a bittender in th\" way of giving it too, or th\" poor sick fools may spit it out i\"
　　their faces. now hamper first gi\"es me a box on my ear, and then hethrows his big bolus at me, and says he reckons it\"ll do me no good, i\"msuch a fool, but there it is.\"
　　\"i wish some of the kindest and wisest of the masters would meet someof you men, and have a good talk on these things; it would, surely, bethe best way of getting over your difficulties, which, i do believe, arisefrom your ignorance--excuse me, mr. higgins--on subjects which it isfor the mutual interest of both masters and men should be wellunderstood by both. i wonder\"--(half to his daughter), \"if mr. thorntonmight not be induced to do such a thing?\"
wwＷ．lzuｏwen.com   



第95章 CHAPTER III COMFORT IN SORROW (6)


　　\"remember, papa,\" said she in a very low voice, \"what he said one day-aboutgovernments, you know.\" she was unwilling to make any clearerallusion to the conversation they had held on the mode of governingwork-people--by giving men intelligence enough to rule themselves, orby a wise despotism on the part of the master--for she saw that higginshad caught mr. thornton s name, if not the whole of the speech: indeed,he began to speak of him.
　　\"thornton! he\"s the chap as wrote off at once for these irishers; and ledto th\" riot that ruined th\" strike. even hamper wi\" all his bullying, wouldha\" waited a while--but it\"s a word and a blow wi\" thornton. and, now,when th\" union would ha\" thanked him for following up th\" chase afterboucher, and them chaps as went right again our commands, it\"sthornton who steps forrard and coolly says that, as th\" strike\"s at an end,he, as party injured, doesn\"t want to press the charge again the rioters. ithought he\"d had more pluck. i thought he\"d ha\" carried his point, andhad his revenge in an open way; but says he (one in court telled me hisvery words) \"they are well known; they will find the natural punishmentof their conduct, in the difficulty they will meet wi\" in gettingemployment. that will be severe enough.\" i only wish they\"d cotchedboucher, and had him up before hamper. i see th\" oud tiger setting onhim! would he ha\" let him off? not he!\"
　　\"mr. thornton was right,\" said margaret. you are angry against boucher,nicholas; or else you would be the first to see, that where the naturalpunishment would be severe enough for the offence, any fartherpunishment would be something like revenge.
　　\"my daughter is no great friend of mr. thornton\"s,\" said mr. hale,smiling at margaret; while she, as red as any carnation, began to workwith double diligence, \"but i believe what she says is the truth. i like
　　him for it.\"
　　\"well, sir, this strike has been a weary piece o\" business to me; and yo\"llnot wonder if i\"m a bit put out wi\" seeing it fail, just for a few men whowould na suffer in silence, and hou\"d out, brave and firm.\"
　　\"you forget!\" said margaret. \"i don\"t know much of boucher; but theonly time i saw him it was not his own sufferings he spoke of, but thoseof his sick wife--his little children.\"
　　\"true! but he were not made of iron himsel\". he\"d ha\" cried out for hisown sorrows, next. he were not one to bear.\"
　　\"how came he into the union?\" asked margaret innocently. \"you don\"tseem to have much respect for him; nor gained much good from havinghim in.\"
　　higgins\"s brow clouded. he was silent for a minute or two.then he said,shortly enough:
　　\"it\"s not for me to speak o\" th\" union. what they does, they does. themthat is of a trade mun hang together; and if they\"re not willing to taketheir chance along wi\" th\" rest, th\" union has ways and means.\"
　　mr. hale saw that higgins was vexed at the turn the conversation hadtaken, and was silent. not so margaret, though she saw higgins\"sfeeling as clearly as he did. by instinct she felt, that if he could but bebrought to express himself in plain words, something clear would begained on which to argue for the right and the just.
　　\"and what are the union\"s ways and means?\"
　　he looked up at her, as if on\" the point of dogged resistance to her wishfor information. but her calm face, fixed on his, patient and trustful,compelled him to answer.
　　\"well! if a man doesn\"t belong to th\" union, them as works next loomshas orders not to speak to him--if he\"s sorry or ill it\"s a\" the same; he\"sout o\" bounds; he\"s none o\" us; he comes among us, he works among us,but he\"s none o\" us. i\" some places them\"s fined who speaks to him. yo\"
　　try that, miss; try living a year or two among them as looks away if yo\"
　　look at \"em; try working within two yards o\" crowds o\" men, who, yo\"
　　know, have a grinding grudge at yo\" in their hearts--to whom if yo\" sayyo\"r glad, not an eye brightens, nor a lip moves,--to whom if yourheart\"s heavy, yo\" can never say nought, because they\"ll ne\"er take noticeon your sighs or sad looks (and a man \"s no man who\"ll groan out loud\"bout folk asking him what \"s the matter?)--just yo\" try that, miss--tenhours for three hundred days, and yo\"ll know a bit what th\" union is.\"
　　\"why!\" said margaret, \"what tyranny this is! nay, higgins, i don\"t careone straw for your anger. i know you can\"t be angry with me if youwould, and i must tell you the truth: that i never read, in all the history ihave read, of a more slow, lingering torture than this. and you belongto the union! and you talk of the tyranny of the masters!\"
　　\"nay,\" said higgins, \"yo\" may say what yo\" like! the dead stand betweenyo and every angry word o\" mine. d\" ye think i forget who\"s lying there,and how hoo loved yo\"? and it\"s th\" masters as has made us sin, if th\"
　　union is a sin. not this generation maybe, but their fathers. theirfathers ground our fathers to the very dust; ground us to powder!
　　parson! i reckon, i\"ve heerd my mother read out a text, \"the fathershave eaten sour grapes and th\" children\"s teeth are set on edge.\" it\"s sowi\" them. in those days of sore oppression th\" unions began; it were anecessity. it\"s a necessity now, according to me. it\"s a withstanding ofinjustice, past, present, or to come. it may be like war; along wi\" it comecrimes; but i think it were a greater crime to let it alone. our onlychance is binding men together in one common interest; and if some arecowards and some are fools, they mun come along and join the greatmarch, whose only strength is in numbers.\"
　　\"oh!\" said mr. hale, sighing, \"your union in itself would be beautiful,glorious,--it would be christianity itself--if it were but for an end whichaffected the good of all, instead of that of merely one class as opposedto another.\"
　　\"i reckon it\"s time for me to be going, sir,\" said higgins, as the clockstruck ten.
　　\"home?\" said margaret very softly. he understood her, and took heroffered hand. \"home, miss. yo\" may trust me, tho\" i am one o\" th\" union.\"
　　\"i do trust you most thoroughly, nicholas.\"
　　\"stay!\" said mr. hale, hurrying to the book-shelves. \"mr. higgins! i\"msure you\"ll join us in family prayer?\"
　　higgins looked at margaret, doubtfully. hey grave sweet eyes met his;there was no compulsion, only deep interest in them. he did not speak,but he kept his place.
　　margaret the churchwoman, her father the dissenter, higgins theinfidel, knelt down together. it did them no harm.




第96章 CHAPTER IV A RAY OF SUNSHINE(1)


　　\"some wishes crossed my mind and dimly cheered it,and one or two poor melancholy pleasures,
　　each in the pale unwarming light of hope,silvering its flimsy wing, flew silent by-mothsin the moonbeam!\"
　　coleridge.
　　the next morning brought margaret a letter from edith. it wasaffectionate and inconsequent like the writer. but the affection wascharming to margaret\"s own affectionate nature; and she had grown upwith the inconsequence, so she did not perceive it. it was as follows:-\"
　　oh, margaret, it is worth a journey from england to see my boy! he isa superb little fellow, especially in his caps, and most especially in theone you sent him, you good, dainty-fingered, persevering little lady!
　　having made all the mothers here envious, i want to show him tosomebody new, and hear a fresh set of admiring expressions; perhaps,that\"s all the reason; perhaps it is not,--nay, possibly, there is just a littlecousinly love mixed with it; but i do want you so much to come here,margaret! i\"m sure it would be the very best thing for aunt hale\"shealth; everybody here is young and well, and our skies are alwaysblue, and our sun always shines, and the band plays deliciously frommorning till night; and, to come back to the burden of my ditty, mybaby always smiles. i am constantly wanting you to draw him for me,margaret. it does not signify what he is doing; that very thing isprettiest, gracefulest, best. i think i love him a great deal better than myhusband, who is getting stout, and grumpy,--what he calls \"busy.\" no!
　　he is not. he has just come in with news of such a charming pic-nic,given by the officers of the hazard, at anchor in the bay below. becausehe has brought in such a pleasant piece of news, i retract all i said justnow. did not somebody burn his hand for having said or donesomething he was sorry for? well, i can\"t burn mine, because it wouldhurt me, and the scar would be ugly; but i\"ll retract all i said as fast as ican. cosmo is quite as great a darling as baby, and not a bit stout, andas un-grumpy as ever husband was; only, sometimes he is very, verybusy. i may say that without love--wifely duty--where was i?--i hadsomething very particular to say, i know, once. oh, it is this--dearestmargaret! --you must come and see me; it would do aunt hale good, asi said before. get the doctor to order it for her. tell him that it\"s thesmoke of milton that does her harm. i have no doubt it is that, really.
　　three months (you must not come for less) of this delicious climate--allsunshine, and grapes as common as blackberries, would quite cure her. idon\"t ask my uncle\"--(here the letter became more constrained, and
　　better written; mr. hale was in the corner, like a naughty child, forhaving given up his living.)--\"because, i dare say, he disapproves ofwar, and soldiers, and bands of music; at least, i know that manydissenters are members of the peace society, and i am afraid he wouldnot like to come; but, if he would, dear, pray say that cosmo and i willdo our best to make him happy; and i\"ll hide up cosmo\"s red coat andsword, and make the band play all sorts of grave, solemn things; or, ifthey do play pomps and vanities, it shall be in double slow time. dearmargaret, if he would like to accompany you and aunt hale, we willtry and make it pleasant, though i\"m rather afraid of any one who hasdone something for conscience sake. you never did, i hope. tell aunthale not to bring many warm clothes, though i\"m afraid it will be late inthe year before you can come. but you have no idea of the heat here! itried to wear my great beauty indian shawl at a pic-nic. i kept myself upwith proverbs as long as i could; \"pride must abide,\"--and suchwholesome pieces of pith; but it was of no use. i was like mamma\"slittle dog tiny with an elephant\"s trappings on; smothered, hidden,killed with my finery; so i made it into a capital carpet for us all to sitdown upon. here\"s this boy of mine, margaret,--if you don\"t pack upyour things as soon as you get this letter, a come straight off to see him,i shall think you\"re descended from king herod!\"
　　margaret did long for a day of edith\"s life--her freedom from care, hercheerful home, her sunny skies. if a wish could have transported her,she would have gone off; just for one day. she yearned for the strengthwhich such a change would give,--even for a few hours to be in themidst of that bright life, and to feel young again. not yet twenty! andshe had had to bear up against such hard pressure that she felt quite old.
　　that was her first feeling after reading edith\"s letter. then she read itagain, and, forgetting herself, was amused at its likeness to edith\"s self,and was laughing merrily over it when mrs. hale came into the drawing-room, leaning on dixon\"s arm. margaret flew to adjust the pillows. hermother seemed more than usually feeble.
　　\"what were you laughing at, margaret?\" asked she, as soon as she hadrecovered from the exertion of settling herself on the sofa.
　　\"a letter i have had this morning from edith. shall i read it you,mamma?\"
　　she read it aloud, and for a time it seemed to interest her mother, whokept wondering what name edith had given to her boy, and suggestingall probable names, and all possible reasons why each and all of thesenames should be given. into the very midst of these wonders mr.
　　thornton came, bringing another offering of fruit for mrs. hale. hecould not--say rather, he would not--deny himself the chance of thepleasure of seeing margaret. he had no end in this but the present
　　gratification. it was the sturdy wilfulness of a man usually mostreasonable and self-controlled. he entered the room, taking in at aglance the fact of margaret\"s presence; but after the first cold distantbow, he never seemed to let his eyes fall on her again. he only stayed topresent his peaches--to speak some gentle kindly words--and then hiscold offended eyes met margaret\"s with a grave farewell, as he left theroom. she sat down silent and pale.
　　\"do you know, margaret, i really begin quite to like mr. thornton.\"
　　no answer at first. then margaret forced out an icy \"do you?\"
　　\"yes! i think he is really getting quite polished in his manners.\"
　　margaret\"s voice was more in order now. she replied,\"he is very kind and attentive,--there is no doubt of that.\"
　　\"i wonder mrs. thornton never calls. she must know i am ill, because ofthe water-bed.\"
　　\"i dare say, she hears how you are from her son.\"




第97章 CHAPTER IV A RAY OF SUNSHINE(2)


　　\"still, i should like to see her you have so few friends here, margaret.\"
　　margaret felt what was in her mother\"s thoughts,--a tender craving tobespeak the kindness of some woman towards the daughter that mightbe so soon left motherless. but she could not speak.
　　\"do you think,\" said mrs. hale, after a pause, \"that you could go and askmrs. thornton to come and see me? only once,--i don\"t want to betroublesome.\"
　　\"i will do anything, if you wish it, mamma,--but if--but when frederickcomes----\"
　　\"ah, to be sure! we must keep our doors shut,--we must let no one in. ihardly know whether i dare wish him to come or not. sometimes i thinki would rather not. sometimes i have such frightful dreams about him.\"
　　\"oh, mamma! we\"ll take good care. i will put my arm in the bolt soonerthan he should come to the slightest harm. trust the care of him to me,mamma. i will watch over him like a lioness over her young.\"
　　\"when can we hear from him?\"
　　\"not for a week yet, certainly,--perhaps more.\"
　　\"we must send martha away in good time. it would never do to have herhere when he comes, and then send her off in a hurry.\"
　　\"dixon is sure to remind us of that. i was thinking that, if we wanted anyhelp in the house while he is here, we could perhaps get mary higgins.
　　she is very slack of work, and is a good girl, and would take pains to doher best, i am sure, and would sleep at home, and need never comeupstairs, so as to know who is in the house.\"
　　\"as you please. as dixon pleases. but, margaret, don\"t get to use thesehorrid milton words. \"slack of work:\" it is a provincialism. what willyour aunt shaw say, if she hears you use it on her return?\"
　　\"oh, mamma! don\"t try and make a bugbear of aunt shaw\" said
　　margaret, laughing. \"edith picked up all sorts of military slang fromcaptain lennox, and aunt shaw never took any notice of it.\"
　　\"but yours is factory slang.\"
　　\"and if i live in a factory town, i must speak factory language when iwant it. why, mamma, i could astonish you with a great many wordsyou never heard in your life. i don\"t believe you know what a knobstickis.\"
　　\"not i, child. i only know it has a very vulgar sound and i don\"t want tohear you using it.\"
　　\"very well, dearest mother, i won\"t. only i shall have to use a wholeexplanatory sentence instead.\"
　　\"i don\"t like this milton,\" said mrs. hale. \"edith is right enough in sayingit\"s the smoke that has made me so ill.\"
　　margaret started up as her mother said this. her father had just enteredthe room, and she was most anxious that the faint impression she hadseen on his mind that the milton air had injured her mother\"s health,should not be deepened,--should not receive any confirmation. shecould not tell whether he had heard what mrs. hale had said or not; butshe began speaking hurriedly of other things, unaware that mr.
　　thornton was following him.
　　\"mamma is accusing me of having picked up a great deal of vulgaritysince we came to milton.\"
　　the \"vulgarity\" margaret spoke of, referred purely to the use of localwords, and the expression arose out of the conversation they had justbeen holding. but mr. thornton\"s brow darkened; and margaretsuddenly felt how her speech might be misunderstood by him; so, in thenatural sweet desire to avoid giving unnecessary pain, she forced herselfto go forwards with a little greeting, and continue what she was saying,addressing herself to him expressly.
　　\"now, mr. thornton, though \"knobstick\" has not a very pretty sound, isit not expressive? could i do without it, in speaking of the thing itrepresents? if using local words is vulgar, i was very vulgar in theforest,--was i not, mamma?\"
　　it was unusual with margaret to obtrude her own subject ofconversation on others; but, in this case, she was so anxious to preventmr. thornton from feeling annoyance at the words he had accidentallyoverheard, that it was not until she had done speaking that she colouredall over with consciousness, more especially as mr. thornton seemedhardly to understand the exact gist or bearing of what she was saying,but passed her by, with a cold reserve of ceremonious movement, tospeak to mrs. hale.
　　the sight of him reminded her of the wish to see his mother, andcommend margaret to her care. margaret, sitting in burning silence,
　　vexed and ashamed of her difficulty in keeping her right place, and hercalm unconsciousness of heart, when mr. thornton was by, heard hermother\"s slow entreaty that mrs. thornton would come and see her; seeher soon; to-morrow, if it were possible. mr. thornton promised thatshe should--conversed a little, and then took his leave; and margaret\"smovements and voice seemed at once released from some invisiblechains. he never looked at her; and yet, the careful avoidance of hiseyes betokened that in some way he knew exactly where, if they fell bychance, they would rest on her. if she spoke, he gave no sign ofattention, and yet his next speech to any one else was modified by whatshe had said; sometimes there was an express answer to what she hadremarked, but given to another person as though unsuggested by her. itwas not the bad manners of ignorance it was the wilful bad mannersarising from deep offence. it was wilful at the time, repented ofafterwards. but no deep plan, no careful cunning could have stood himin such good stead. margaret thought about him more than she had everdone before; not with any tinge of what is called love, but with regretthat she had wounded him so deeply,--and with a gentle, patient strivingto return to their former position of antagonistic friendship; for afriend\"s position was what she found that he had held in her regard, aswell as in that of the rest of the family. there was a pretty humility inher behaviour to him, as if mutely apologising for the over-strong wordswhich were the reaction from the deeds of the day of the riot.
　　but he resented those words bitterly. they rung in his ears; and he wasproud of the sense of justice which made him go on in every kindnesshe could offer to her parents. he exulted in the power he showed incompelling himself to face her, whenever he could think of any actionwhich might give her father or mother pleasure. he thought that hedisliked seeing one who had mortified him so keenly; but he wasmistaken. it was a stinging pleasure to be in the room with her, and feelher presence. but he was no great analyser of his own motives, and wasmistaken as [ have said.




第98章 CHAPTER V HOME AT LAST (1)


　　\"the saddest birds a season find to sing.\"
　　southwell.
　　\"never to fold the robe o\"er secret pain,never, weighed down by memory\"s clouds again,to bow thy head! thou art gone home!\"
　　mrs. hemans.
　　mrs. thornton came to see mrs. hale the next morning. she was muchworse. one of those sudden changes--those great visible strides towardsdeath, had been taken in the night, and her own family were startled bythe gray sunken look her features had assumed in that one twelve hoursof suffering. mrs. thornton--who had not seen her for weeks--wassoftened all at once. she had come because her son asked it from her asa personal favour, but with all the proud bitter feelings of her nature inarms against that family of which margaret formed one. she doubtedthe reality of mrs. hale\"s illness; she doubted any want beyond amomentary fancy on that lady\"s part, which should take her out of herpreviously settled course of employment for the day. she told her sonthat she wished they had never come near the place; that he had nevergot acquainted with them; that there had been no such useless languagesas latin and greek ever invented. he bore all this pretty silently; butwhen she had ended her invective against the dead languages, he quietlyreturned to the short, curt, decided expression of his wish that sheshould go and see mrs. hale at the time appointed, as most likely to beconvenient to the invalid. mrs. thornton submitted with as bad a graceas she could to her son\"s desire, all the time liking him the better forhaving it; and exaggerating in her own mind the same notion that hehad of extraordinary goodness on his part in so perseveringly keepingup with the hales.
　　his goodness verging on weakness (as all the softer virtues did in hermind), and her own contempt for mr. and mrs. hale, and positivedislike to margaret, were the ideas which occupied mrs. thornton, tillshe was struck into nothingness before the dark shadow of the wings ofthe angel of death. there lay mrs. hale--a mother like herself--a muchyounger woman than she was,--on the bed from which there was nosign of hope that she might ever rise again no more variety of light andshade for her in that darkened room; no power of action, scarcelychange of movement; faint alternations of whispered sound andstudious silence; and yet that monotonous life seemed almost too much!
　　when mrs. thornton, strong and prosperous with life, came in, mrs.
　　hale lay still, although from the look on her face she was evidentlyconscious of who it was. but she did not even open her eyes for aminute or two. the heavy moisture of tears stood on the eye-lashesbefore she looked up, then with her hand groping feebly over the bedclothes,for the touch of mrs. thornton\"s large firm fingers, she said,scarcely above her breath--mrs. thornton had to stoop from hererectness to listen,-\"
　　margaret--you have a daughter--my sister is in italy. my child will bewithout a mother;--in a strange place,--if i die--will you\"---andher filmy wandering eyes fixed themselves with an intensity ofwistfulness on mrs. thornton\"s face for a minute, there was no changein its rigidness; it was stern and unmoved;--nay, but that the eyes of thesick woman were growing dim with the slow-gathering tears, she mighthave seen a dark cloud cross the cold features. and it was no thought ofher son, or of her living daughter fanny, that stirred her heart at last; buta sudden remembrance, suggested by something in the arrangement ofthe room,--of a little daughter--dead in infancy--long years ago--that,like a sudden sunbeam, melted the icy crust, behind which there was areal tender woman.
　　\"you wish me to be a friend to miss hale,\" said mrs. thornton, in hermeasured voice, that would not soften with her heart, but came outdistinct and clear.
　　mrs. hale, her eyes still fixed on mrs. thornton\"s face, pressed the handthat lay below hers on the coverlet. she could not speak. mrs. thorntonsighed, \"i will. be a true friend, if circumstances require it not a tenderfriend. that i cannot be,\"--(\"to her,\" she was on the point of adding, butshe relented at the sight of that poor, anxious face.)--\"it is not my natureto show affection even where i feel it, nor do i volunteer advice ingeneral. still, at your request,--if it will be any comfort to you, i willpromise you.\" then came a pause. mrs. thornton was too conscientiousto promise what she did not mean to perform; and to perform any-thingin the way of kindness on behalf of margaret, more disliked at thismoment than ever, was difficult; almost impossible.
　　\"i promise,\" said she, with grave severity; which, after all, inspired thedying woman with faith as in something more stable than life itself,-flickering,flitting, wavering life! \"i promise that in any difficulty inwhich miss hale\"---\"
　　call her margaret!\" gasped mrs. hale.
　　\"in which she comes to me for help, i will help her with every power ihave, as if she were my own daughter. i also promise that if ever i seeher doing what i think is wrong\"---\"
　　but margaret never does wrong--not wilfully wrong,\" pleaded mrs.
　　hale. mrs. thornton went on as before; as if she had not heard:
　　\"if ever i see her doing what i believe to be wrong--such wrong nottouching me or mine, in which case i might be supposed to have aninterested motive--i will tell her of it, faithfully and plainly, as i shouldwish my own daughter to be told.\"
　　there was a long pause. mrs. hale felt that this promise did not includeall; and yet it was much. it had reservations in it which she did notunderstand; but then she was weak, dizzy, and tired. mrs. thornton wasreviewing all the probable cases in which she had pledged herself to act.
　　she had a fierce pleasure in the idea of telling margaret unwelcometruths, in the shape of performance of duty. mrs. hale began to speak:
　　\"i thank you. i pray god to bless you. i shall never see you again in thisworld. but my last words are, i thank you for your promise of kindnessto my child.\"
　　\"not kindness!\" testified mrs. thornton, ungraciously truthful to the last.
　　but having eased her conscience by saying these words, she was notsorry that they were not heard. she pressed mrs. hale\"s soft languidhand; and rose up and went her way out of the house without seeing acreature.
　　during the time that mrs. thornton was having this interview with mrs.
www.xiabook.com  www.7wenxue.com



第99章 CHAPTER V HOME AT LAST (2)


　　hale, margaret and dixon were laying their heads together, andconsulting how they should keep frederick\"s coming a profound secretto all out of the house. a letter from him might now be expected anyday; and he would assuredly follow quickly on its heels. martha mustbe sent away on her holiday; dixon must keep stern guard on the frontdoor, only admitting the few visitors that ever came to the house intomr. hale\"s room down-stairs--mrs. hale\"s extreme illness giving her agood excuse for this. if mary higgins was required as a help to dixonin the kitchen she was to hear and see as little of frederick as possible;and he was, if necessary to be spoken of to her under the name of mr.
　　dickinson. but. her sluggish and incurious nature was the greatestsafeguard of all.
　　they resolved that martha should leave them that very afternoon forthis visit to her mother. margaret wished that she had been sent away onthe previous day, as she fancied it might be thought strange to give aservant a holiday when her mistress\"s state required so much attendance.
　　poor margaret! all that afternoon she had to act the part of a romandaughter, and give strength out of her own scanty stock to her father.
　　mr. hale would hope, would not despair, between the attacks of hiswife\"s malady; he buoyed himself up in every respite from her pain, andbelieved that it was the beginning of ultimate recovery. and so, whenthe paroxysms came on, each more severe than the last, they were freshagonies, and greater disappointments to him. this afternoon, he sat in
　　the drawing-room, unable to bear the solitude of his study, or to employhimself in any way. he buried his head in his arms, which lay folded onthe table. margaret\"s heart ached to see him; yet, as he did not speak,she did not like to volunteer any attempt at comfort. martha was gone.
　　dixon sat with mrs. hale while she slept. the house was very still andquiet, and darkness came on, without any movement to procure candles.
　　margaret sat at the window, looking out at the lamps and the street, butseeing nothing,--only alive to her father\"s heavy sighs. she did not liketo go down for lights, lest the tacit restraint of her presence beingwithdrawn, he might give way to more violent emotion, without herbeing at hand to comfort him. yet she was just thinking that she oughtto go and see after the well-doing of the kitchen fire, which there wasnobody but herself to attend to when she heard the muffled door-ringwith so violent a pull, that the wires jingled all through the house,though the positive sound was not great. she started up, passed herfather, who had never moved at the veiled, dull sound,--returned, andkissed him tenderly. and still he never moved, nor took any notice ofher fond embrace. then she went down softly, through the dark, to thedoor. dixon would have put the chain on before she opened it, butmargaret had not a thought of fear in her pre-occupied mind. a man\"stall figure stood between her and the luminous street. he was lookingaway; but at the sound of the latch he turned quickly round.
　　\"is this mr. hale\"s?\" said he, in a clear, full, delicate voice.
　　margaret trembled all over; at first she did not answer. in a moment shesighed out,\"frederick!\" and stretched out both her hands to catch his, and draw himin.
　　\"oh, margaret!\" said he, holding her off by her shoulders, after they hadkissed each other, as if even in that darkness he could see her face, andread in its expression a quicker answer to his question than words couldgive,-\"
　　my mother! is she alive?\"
　　\"yes, she is alive, dear, dear brother! she--as ill as she can be she is; butalive! she is alive!\"
　　\"thank god!\" said he.
　　\"papa is utterly prostrate with this great grief.\"
　　\"you expect me, don\"t you?\"
　　\"no, we have had no letter.\"
　　\"then i have come before it. but my mother knows i am coming?\"
　　\"oh! we all knew you would come. but wait a little! step in here. giveme your hand. what is this? oh! your carpet-bag. dixon has shut theshutters; but this is papa\"s study, and i can take you to a chair to restyourself for a few minutes; while i go and tell him.\"
　　she groped her way to the taper and the lucifer matches. she suddenlyfelt shy, when the little feeble light made them visible. all she could seewas, that her brother\"s face was unusually dark in complexion, and shecaught the stealthy look of a pair of remarkably long-cut blue eyes, thatsuddenly twinkled up with a droll consciousness of their mutualpurpose of inspecting each other. but though the brother and sister hadan instant of sympathy in their reciprocal glances, they did notexchange a word; only, margaret felt sure that she should like herbrother as a companion as much as she already loved him as a nearrelation. her heart was wonderfully lighter as she went up-stairs; thesorrow was no less in reality, but it became less oppressive from havingsome one in precisely the same relation to it as that in which she stood.
　　not her father\"s desponding attitude had power to damp her now. he layacross the table, helpless as ever; but she had the spell by which torouse him. she used it perhaps too violently in her own great relief.
　　\"papa,\" said she, throwing her arms fondly round his neck; pulling hisweary head up in fact with her gentle violence, till it rested in her arms,and she could look into his eyes, and let them gain strength andassurance from hers.
　　\"papa! guess who is here!\"
　　he looked at her; she saw the idea of the truth glimmer into their filmysadness, and be dismissed thence as a wild imagination.
　　he threw himself forward, and hid his face once more in his stretched-out arms, resting upon the table as heretofore. she heard him whisper;she bent tenderly down to listen. \"i don\"t know. don\"t tell me it isfrederick--not frederick. i cannot bear it,--i am too weak. and hismother is dying!\"he began to cry and wail like a child. it was sodifferent to all which margaret had hoped and expected, that she turnedsick with disappointment, and was silent for an instant. then she spokeagain--very differently--not so exultingly, far more tenderly andcarefully.
　　\"papa, it is frederick! think of mamma, how glad she will be! and oh,for her sake, how glad we ought to be! for his sake, too,--our poor, poorboy!\"
　　her father did not change his attitude, but he seemed to be trying tounderstand the fact.
wwＷ．7wenxue.com



第100章 CHAPTER V HOME AT LAST (3)


　　\"where is he?\" asked he at last, his face still hidden in his prostrate arms.
　　\"in your study, quite alone. i lighted the taper, and ran up to tell you. heis quite alone, and will be wondering why--\"
　　\"i will go to him,\" broke in her father; and he lifted himself up and leanton her arm as on that of a guide.
　　margaret led him to the study door, but her spirits were so agitated thatshe felt she could not bear to see the meeting. she turned away, and ran
　　up-stairs, and cried most heartily. it was the first time she had dared toallow herself this relief for days. the strain had been terrible, as shenow felt. but frederick was come! he, the one precious brother, wasthere, safe, amongst them again! she could hardly believe it. shestopped her crying, and opened her bedroom door. she heard no soundof voices, and almost feared she might have dreamt. she went downstairs,and listened at the study door. she heard the buzz of voices; andthat was enough. she went into the kitchen, and stirred up the fire, andlighted the house, and prepared for the wanderer\"s refreshment. howfortunate it was that her mother slept! she knew that she did, from thecandle-lighter thrust through the keyhole of her bedroom door. thetraveller could be refreshed and bright, and the first excitement of themeeting with his father all be over, before her mother became aware ofanything unusual.
　　when all was ready, margaret opened the study door, and went in like aserving-maiden, with a heavy tray. held in her extended arms. she wasproud of serving frederick. but he, when he saw her, sprang up in aminute, and relieved her of her burden. it was a type, a sign, of all thecoming relief which his presence would bring. the brother and sisterarranged the table together, saying little, but their hands touching, andtheir eyes speaking the natural language of expression, so intelligible tothose of the same blood. the fire had gone out; and margaret appliedherself to light it, for the evenings had begun to be chilly; and yet it wasdesirable to make all noises as distant as possible from mrs. hale\"sroom.
　　\"dixon says it is a gift to light a fire; not an art to be acquired.\"
　　\"poeta nascitur, non fit,\" murmured mr. hale; and margaret was glad tohear a quotation once more, however languidly given.
　　\"dear old dixon! how we shall kiss each other!\" said frederick. \"sheused to kiss me, and then look in my face to be sure i was the rightperson, and then set to again! but, margaret, what a bungler you are! inever saw such a little awkward, good-for-nothing pair of hands. runaway, and wash them, ready to cut bread-and-butter for me, and leavethe fire. i\"ll manage it. lighting fires is one of my naturalaccomplishments.\"
　　so margaret went away; and returned; and passed in and out of theroom, in a glad restlessness that could not be satisfied with sitting still.
　　the more wants frederick had, the better she was pleased; and heunderstood all this by instinct. it was a joy snatched in the house ofmourning, and the zest of it was all the more pungent, because theyknew in the depths of their hearts what irremediable sorrow awaitedthem.
　　in the middle, they heard dixon\"s foot on the stairs. mr. hale started
　　from his languid posture in his great armchair, from which he had beenwatching his children in a dreamy way, as if they were acting somedrama of happiness, which it was pretty to look at, but which wasdistinct from reality, and in which he had no part. he stood up, andfaced the door, showing such a strange, sudden anxiety to concealfrederick from the sight of any person entering, even though it were thefaithful dixon, that a shiver came over margaret\"s heart: it reminded herof the new fear in their lives. she caught at frederick\"s arm, andclutched it tight, while a stern thought compressed her brows, andcaused her to set her teeth. and yet they knew it was only dixon\"smeasured tread. they heard her walk the length of the passage, into thekitchen. margaret rose up.
　　i will go to her, and tell her. and i shall hear how mamma is.\" mrs. halewas awake. she rambled at first; but after they had given her some teashe was refreshed, though not disposed to talk. it was better that thenight should pass over before she was told of her son\"s arrival. dr.
　　donaldson\"s appointed visit would bring nervous excitement enough forthe evening; and he might tell them how to prepare her for seeingfrederick. he was there, in the house; could be summoned at anymoment.
www.xiabook.com



第101章 CHAPTER V HOME AT LAST (4)


　　margaret could not sit still. it was a relief to her to aid dixon in all herpreparations for \"master frederick.\" it seemed as though she never couldbe tired again. each glimpse into the room where he sate by his father,conversing with him, about, she knew not what, nor cared to know,-wasincrease of strength to her. her own time for talking and hearingwould come at last, and she was too certain of this to feel in a hurry tograsp it now. she took in his appearance and liked it. he had delicatefeatures, redeemed from effeminacy by the swarthiness of hiscomplexion, and his quick intensity of expression. his eyes weregenerally merry-looking, but at times they and his mouth so suddenlychanged, and gave her such an idea of latent passion, that it almostmade her afraid. but this look was only for an instant; and had in it nodoggedness, no vindictiveness; it was rather the instantaneous ferocityof expression that comes over the countenances of all natives of wild orsouthern countries--a ferocity which enhances the charm of the childlikesoftness into which such a look may melt away. margaret might fear theviolence of the impulsive nature thus occasionally betrayed, but therewas nothing in it to make her distrust, or recoil in the least, from thenew-found brother. on the contrary, all their intercourse was peculiarlycharming to her from the very first. she knew then how muchresponsibility she had had to bear, from the exquisite sensation of reliefwhich she felt in frederick\"s presence. he understood his father andmother--their characters and their weaknesses, and went along with a
　　careless freedom, which was yet most delicately careful not to hurt orwound any of their feelings. he seemed to know instinctively when alittle of the natural brilliancy of his manner and conversation would notjar on the deep depression of his father, or might relieve his mother\"spain. whenever it would have been out of tune, and out of time, hispatient devotion and watchfulness came into play, and made him anadmirable nurse. then margaret was almost touched into tears by theallusions which he often made to their childish days in the new forest;he had never forgotten her--or helstone either--all the time he had beenroaming among distant countries and foreign people. she might talk tohim of the old spot, and never fear tiring him. she had been afraid ofhim before he came, even while she had longed for his coming; sevenor eight years had, she felt, produced such great changes in herself that,forgetting how much of the original margaret was left, she had reasonedthat if her tastes and feelings had so materially altered, even in her stay-at-home life, his wild career, with which she was but imperfectlyacquainted, must have almost substituted another frederick for the tallstripling in his middy\"s uniform, whom she remembered looking up towith such admiring awe. but in their absence they had grown nearer toeach other in age, as well as in many other things. and so it was that theweight, this sorrowful time, was lightened to margaret. other light thanthat of frederick\"s presence she had none. for a few hours, the motherrallied on seeing her son. she sate with his hand in hers; she would notpart with it even while she slept; and margaret had to feed him like ababy, rather than that he should disturb her mother by removing afinger. mrs. hale wakened while they were thus engaged; she slowlymoved her head round on the pillow, and smiled at her children, as sheunderstood what they were doing, and why it was done.
　　\"i am very selfish,\" said she; \"but it will not be for long.\" frederick bentdown and kissed the feeble hand that imprisoned his.
　　this state of tranquillity could not endure for many days, nor perhapsfor many hours; so dr. donaldson assured margaret. after the kinddoctor had gone away, she stole down to frederick, who, during thevisit, had been adjured to remain quietly concealed in the back parlour,usually dixon\"s bedroom, but now given up to him.
　　margaret told him what dr. donaldson said.
　　\"i don\"t believe it,\" he exclaimed. \"she is very ill; she may bedangerously ill, and in immediate danger, too; but i can\"t imagine thatshe could be as she is, if she were on the point of death. margaret! sheshould have some other advice--some london doctor. have you neverthought of that?\"
　　\"yes,\" said margaret, \"more than once. but i don\"t believe it would doany good. and, you know, we have not the money to bring any great
　　london surgeon down, and i am sure dr. donaldson is only second inskill to the very best,--if, indeed, he is to them.\"
　　frederick began to walk up and down the room impatiently.
www.xiabook.com



第102章 CHAPTER V HOME AT LAST (5)


　　\"i have credit in cadiz,\" said he, \"but none here, owing to this wretchedchange of name. why did my father leave helstone? that was theblunder.\"
　　\"it was no blunder,\" said margaret gloomily. \"and above all possiblechances, avoid letting papa hear anything like what you have just beensaying. i can see that he is tormenting himself already with the idea thatmamma would never have been ill if we had stayed at helstone, andyou don\"t know papa\"s agonising power of self-reproach!\"
　　frederick walked away as if he were on the quarter-deck. at last hestopped right opposite to margaret, and looked at her drooping anddesponding attitude for an instant.
　　\"my little margaret!\" said he, caressing her. \"let us hope as long as wecan. poor little woman! what! is this face all wet with tears? i will hope.
　　i will, in spite of a thousand doctors. bear up, margaret, and be braveenough to hope!\"
　　margaret choked in trying to speak, and when she did it was very low.
　　\"i must try to be meek enough to trust. oh, frederick! mamma wasgetting to love me so! and i was getting to understand her. and nowcomes death to snap us asunder!\"
　　\"come, come, come! let us go up-stairs, and do something, rather thanwaste time that may be so precious. thinking has, many a time, mademe sad, darling; but doing never did in all my life. my theory is a sortof parody on the maxim of \"get money, my son, honestly if you can;but get money. my precept is, \"do something, my sister, do good if youcan; but, at any rate, do something.\"\"
　　\"not excluding mischief,\" said margaret, smiling faintly through hertears.
　　\"by no means. what i do exclude is the remorse afterwards. blot yourmisdeeds out (if you are particularly conscientious), by a good deed, assoon as you can; just as we did a correct sum at school on the slate,where an incorrect one was only half rubbed out. it was better thanwetting our sponge with our tears; both less loss of time where tears hadto be waited for, and a better effect at last.\"
　　if margaret thought frederick\"s theory rather a rough one at first, shesaw how he worked it out into continual production of kindness in fact.
　　after a bad night with his mother (for he insisted on taking his turn as asitter-up) he was busy next morning before breakfast, contriving a leg-rest for dixon, who was beginning to feel the fatigues of watching. atbreakfast-time, he interested mr. hale with vivid, graphic, rattlingaccounts of the wild life he had led in mexico, south america, and
　　elsewhere. margaret would have given up the effort in despair to rousemr. hale out of his dejection; it would even have affected herself andrendered her incapable of talking at all. but fred, true to his theory, didsomething perpetually; and talking was the only thing to be done,besides eating, at breakfast.
　　before the night of that day, dr. donaldson\"s opinion was proved to betoo well founded. convulsions came on; and when they ceased, mrs.
　　hale was unconscious. her husband might lie by her shaking the bedwith his sobs; her son\"s strong arms might lift her tenderly up into acomfortable position; her daughter\"s hands might bathe her face; but sheknew them not. she would never recognise them again, till they met inheaven.
　　before the morning came all was over.
　　then margaret rose from her trembling and despondency, and becameas a strong angel of comfort to her father and brother. for frederick hadbroken down now, and all his theories were of no use to him. he criedso violently when shut up alone in his little room at night, that margaretand dixon came down in affright to warn him to be quiet: for the housepartitions were but thin, and the next-door neighbours might easily hearhis youthful passionate sobs, so different from the slower tremblingagony of after-life, when we become inured to grief, and dare not berebellious against the inexorable doom, knowing who it is that decrees.
　　margaret sate with her father in the room with the dead. if he had cried,she would have been thankful. but he sate by the bed quite quietly;only, from time to time, he uncovered the face, and stroked it gently,making a kind of soft inarticulate noise, like that of some mother-animal caressing her young. he took no notice of margaret\"s presence.
　　once or twice she came up to kiss him; and he submitted to it, givingher a little push away when she had done, as if her affection disturbedhim from his absorption in the dead. he started when he heardfrederick\"s cries, and shook his head:--\"poor boy! poor boy!\" he said,and took no more notice. margaret\"s heart ached within her. she couldnot think of her own loss in thinking of her father\"s case. the night waswearing away, and the day was at hand, when, without a word ofpreparation, margaret\"s voice broke upon the stillness of the room, witha clearness of sound that startled even herself: \"let not your heart betroubled,\" it said; and she went steadily on through all that chapter ofunspeakable consolation.
  www.7wenxue.com　  



第103章 CHAPTER VI \"SHOULD AULD ACQUAINTANCE BE FORGOT?\" (


　　\"show not that manner, and these features all,the serpent\"s cunning, and the sinner\"s fall?\"
　　crabbe.
　　the chill, shivery october morning came; not the october morning ofthe country, with soft, silvery mists, clearing off before the sunbeamsthat bring out all the gorgeous beauty of colouring, but the octobermorning of milton, whose silver mists were heavy fogs, and where thesun could only show long dusky streets when he did break through andshine. margaret went languidly about, assisting dixon in her task ofarranging the house. her eyes were continually blinded by tears, but shehad no time to give way to regular crying. the father and brotherdepended upon her; while they were giving way to grief, she must beworking, planning, considering. even the necessary arrangements forthe funeral seemed to devolve upon her.
　　when the fire was bright and crackling--when everything was ready forbreakfast, and the tea-kettle was singing away, margaret gave a lastlook round the room before going to summon mr. hale and frederick.
　　she wanted everything to look as cheerful as possible; and yet, when itdid so, the contrast between it and her own thoughts forced her intosudden weeping. she was kneeling by the sofa, hiding her face in thecushions that no one might hear her cry, when she was touched on theshoulder by dixon.
　　\"come, miss hale--come, my dear! you must not give way, or whereshall we all be? there is not another person in the house fit to give adirection of any kind, and there is so much to be done. there\"s who\"s tomanage the funeral; and who\"s to come to it; and where it\"s to be; and allto be settled: and master frederick\"s like one crazed with crying, andmaster never was a good one for settling; and, poor gentleman, he goesabout now as if he was lost. it\"s bad enough, my dear, i know; but deathcomes to us all; and you\"re well off never to have lost any friend tillnow.\"perhaps so. but this seemed a loss by itself; not to bearcomparison with any other event in the world. margaret did not takeany comfort from what dixon said, but the unusual tenderness of theprim old servant\"s manner touched her to the heart; and, more from adesire to show her gratitude for this than for any other reason, sheroused herself up, and smiled in answer to dixon\"s anxious look at her;
　　and went to tell her father and brother that breakfast was ready.
　　mr. hale came--as if in a dream, or rather with the unconscious motionof a sleep-walker, whose eyes and mind perceive other things than whatare present. frederick came briskly in, with a forced cheerfulness,grasped her hand, looked into her eyes, and burst into tears. she had totry and think of little nothings to say all breakfast-time, in order toprevent the recurrence of her companions\" thoughts too strongly to thelast meal they bad taken together, when there had been a continualstrained listening for some sound or signal from the sick-room.
　　after breakfast, she resolved to speak to her father, about the funeral.
　　he shook his head, and assented to all she proposed, though many ofher propositions absolutely contradicted one another. margaret gainedno real decision from him; and was leaving the room languidly, to havea consultation with dixon, when mr. hale motioned her back to hisside.
　　\"ask mr. bell,\" said he in a hollow voice.
　　\"mr. bell!\" said she, a little surprised. \"mr. bell of oxford?\"
　　\"mr. bell,\" he repeated. \"yes. he was my groom\"s-man.\"
　　margaret understood the association.
　　\"i will write to-day,\" said she. he sank again into listlessness. allmorning she toiled on, longing for rest, but in a continual whirl ofmelancholy business.
　　towards evening, dixon said to her:
　　\"i\"ve done it, miss. i was really afraid for master, that he\"d have a strokewith grief. he\"s been all this day with poor missus; and when i\"velistened at the door, i\"ve heard him talking to her, and talking to her, asif she was alive. when i went in he would be quite quiet, but all in amaze like. so i thought to myself, he ought to be roused; and if it giveshim a shock at first, it will, maybe, be the better afterwards. so i\"vebeen and told him, that i don\"t think it\"s safe for master frederick to behere. and i don\"t. it was only on tuesday, when i was out, that i met-asouthampton man--the first i\"ve seen since i came to milton; they don\"tmake their way much up here, i think. well, it was young leonards, oldleonards the draper\"s son, as great a scamp as ever lived--who plaguedhis father almost to death, and then ran off to sea. i never could abidehim. he was in the orion at the same time as master frederick, i know;though i don\"t recollect if he was there at the mutiny.\"
　　\"did he know you?\" said margaret, eagerly.
　　\"why, that\"s the worst of it. i don\"t believe he would have known me butfor my being such a fool as to call out his name. he were asouthampton man, in a strange place, or else i should never have beenso ready to call cousins with him, a nasty, good-for-nothing fellow.
　　says he, \"miss dixon! who would ha\" thought of seeing you here? but
　　perhaps i mistake, and you\"re miss dixon no longer?\" so i told him hemight still address me as an unmarried lady, though if i hadn\"t been soparticular, i\"d had good chances of matrimony. he was polite enough:




第104章 CHAPTER VI \"SHOULD AULD ACQUAINTANCE BE FORGOT?\" (


　　\"he couldn\"t look at me and doubt me.\" but i were not to be caughtwith such chaff from such a fellow as him, and so i told him; and, byway of being even, i asked him after his father (who i knew had turnedhim out of doors), as if they was the best friends as ever was. so then,to spite me--for you see we were getting savage, for all we were so civilto each other--he began to inquire after master frederick, and said, whata scrape he\"d got into (as if master frederick\"s scrapes would ever washgeorge leonards\" white, or make \"em look otherwise than nasty, dirtyblack), and how he\"d be hung for mutiny if ever he were caught, andhow a hundred pound reward had been offered for catching him, andwhat a disgrace he had been to his family--all to spite me, you see, mydear, because before now i\"ve helped old mr. leonards to give george agood rating, down in southampton. so i said, there were other familiesbe thankful if they could think they were earning an honest living as iknew, who had far more cause to blush for their sons, and to far awayfrom home. to which he made answer, like the impudent chap he is,that he were in a confidential situation, and if i knew of any young manwho had been so unfortunate as to lead vicious courses, and wanted toturn steady, he\"d have no objection to lend him his patronage. he,indeed! why, he\"d corrupt a sairt. i\"ve not felt so bad myself for years aswhen i were standing talking to him the other day. i could have cried tothink i couldn\"t spite him better, for he kept smiling in my face, as if hetook all my compliments for earnest; and i couldn\"t see that he mindedwhat i said in the least, while i was mad with all his speeches.\"
　　\"but you did not tell him anything about us--about frederick?\"
　　\"not i,\" said dixon. \"he had never the grace to ask where i was staying;and i shouldn\"t have told him if he had asked. nor did i ask him whathis precious situation was. he was waiting for a bus, and just then itdrove up, and he hailed it. but, to plague me to the last, he turned backbefore he got in, and said, \"if you can help me to trap lieutenant hale,miss dixon, we\"ll go partners in the reward. i know you\"d like to be mypartner, now wouldn\"t you? don\"t be shy, but say yes.\" and he jumpedon the bus, and i saw his ugly face leering at me with a wicked smile tothink how he\"d had the last word of plaguing.\"
　　margaret was made very uncomfortable by this account of dixon\"s.
　　\"have you told frederick?\" asked she.
　　\"no,\" said dixon. \"i were uneasy in my mind at knowing that badleonards was in town; but there was so much else to think about that idid not dwell on it at all. but when i saw master sitting so stiff, and withhis eyes so glazed and sad, i thought it might rouse him to have to think
　　of master frederick\"s safety a bit. so i told him all, though i blushed tosay how a young man had been speaking to me. and it has done mastergood. and if we\"re to keep master frederick in hiding, he would have togo, poor fellow, before mr. bell came.\"
　　\"oh, i\"m not afraid of mr. bell; but i am afraid of this leonards. i musttell frederick. what did leonards look like?\"
　　\"a bad-looking fellow, i can assure you, miss. whiskers such as ishould be ashamed to wear--they are so red. and for all he said he\"d gota confidential situation, he was dressed in fustian just like a workingman.\"
　　it was evident that frederick must go. go, too, when he had socompletely vaulted into his place in the family, and promised to be sucha stay and staff to his father and sister. go, when his cares for the livingmother, and sorrow for the dead, seemed to make him one of thosepeculiar people who are bound to us by a fellow-love for them that aretaken away. just as margaret was thinking all this, sitting over thedrawing-room fire--her father restless and uneasy under the pressure ofthis newly-aroused fear, of which he had not as yet spoken--frederickcame in, his brightness dimmed, but the extreme violence of his griefpassed away. he came up to margaret, and kissed her forehead.
　　\"how wan you look, margaret!\" said he in a low voice. \"you have beenthinking of everybody, and no one has thought of you. lie on this sofa-thereis nothing for you to do.\"
　　\"that is the worst,\" said margaret, in a sad whisper. but she went and laydown, and her brother covered her feet with a shawl, and then sate onthe ground by her side; and the two began to talk in a subdued tone.
　　margaret told him all that dixon had related of her interview withyoung leonards. frederick\"s lips closed with a long whew of dismay.
　　\"i should just like to have it out with that young fellow. a worse sailorwas never on board ship--nor a much worse man either. i declare,margaret--you know the circumstances of the whole affair?\"
　　\"yes, mamma told me.\"
　　\"well, when all the sailors who were good for anything were indignantwith our captain, this fellow, to curry favour--pah! and to think of hisbeing here! oh, if he\"d a notion i was within twenty miles of him, he\"dferret me out to pay off old grudges. i\"d rather anybody had the hundredpounds they think i am worth than that rascal. what a pity poor olddixon could not be persuaded to give me up, and make a provision forher old age!\"
　　\"oh, frederick, hush! don\"t talk so.\"
　　mr. hale came towards them, eager and trembling. he had overheardwhat they were saying. he took frederick\"s hand in both of his:
　　\"my boy, you must go. it is very bad--but i see you must. you have
　　done all you could--you have been a comfort to her.\"
　　\"oh, papa, must he go?\" said margaret, pleading against her ownconviction of necessity.
　　\"i declare, i\"ve a good mind to face it out, and stand my trial. if i couldonly pick up my evidence! i cannot endure the thought of being in thepower of such a blackguard as leonards. i could almost have enjoyed-inother circumstances--this stolen visit: it has had all the charm whichthe french-woman attributed to forbidden pleasures.\"
　　\"one of the earliest things i can remember,\" said margaret, \"was yourbeing in some great disgrace, fred, for stealing apples. we had plentyof our own--trees loaded with them; but some one had told you thatstolen fruit tasted sweetest, which you took au pied de la lettre, and offyou went a-robbing. you have not changed your feelings much sincethen.\"




第105章 CHAPTER VI \"SHOULD AULD ACQUAINTANCE BE FORGOT?\" (


　　\"yes--you must go,\" repeated mr. hale, answering margaret\"s question,which she had asked some time ago. his thoughts were fixed on onesubject, and it was an effort to him to follow the zig-zag remarks of hischildren--an effort which ho did not make.
　　margaret and frederick looked at each other. that quick momentarysympathy would be theirs no longer if he went away. so much wasunderstood through eyes that could not be put into words. both coursedthe same thought till it was lost in sadness. frederick shook it off first:
　　\"do you know, margaret, i was very nearly giving both dixon andmyself a good fright this afternoon. i was in my bedroom; i had heard aring at the front door, but i thought the ringer must have done hisbusiness and gone away long ago; so i was on the point of making myappearance in the passage, when, as i opened my room door, i sawdixon coming downstairs; and she frowned and kicked me into hidingagain. i kept the door open, and heard a message given to some manthat was in my father\"s study, and that then went away. who could ithave been? some of the shopmen?\"
　　\"very likely,\" said margaret, indifferently. \"there was a little quiet manwho came up for orders about two o\"clock.\"
　　\"but this was not a little man--a great powerful fellow; and it was pastfour when he was here.\"
　　\"it was mr. thornton,\" said mr. hale. they were glad to have drawn himinto the conversation.
　　\"mr. thornton!\" said margaret, a little surprised. \"i thought----\"
　　\"well, little one, what did you think?\" asked frederick, as she did notfinish her sentence.
　　\"oh, only,\" said she, reddening and looking straight at him, \"i fanciedyou meant some one of a different class, not a gentleman; somebodycome on an errand.\"
　　\"he looked like some one of that kind,\" said frederick, carelessly. \"i tookhim for a shopman, and he turns out a manufacturer.\"
　　margaret was silent. she remembered how at first, before she knew hischaracter, she had spoken and thought of him just as frederick wasdoing. it was but a natural impression that was made upon him, and yetshe was a little annoyed by it. she was unwilling to speak; she wantedto make frederick understand what kind of person mr. thornton was-butshe was tongue-tied.
　　mr. hale went on. \"he came to offer any assistance in his power, ibelieve. but i could not see him. i told dixon to ask him if he wouldlike to see you--i think i asked her to find you, and you would go tohim. i don\"t know what i said.\"
　　\"he has been a very agreeable acquaintance, has he not?\" askedfrederick, throwing the question like a ball for any one to catch whochose.
　　\"a very kind friend,\" said margaret, when her father did not answer.
　　frederick was silent for a time. at last he spoke:
　　\"margaret, it is painful to think i can never thank those who have shownyou kindness. your acquaintances and mine must be separate. unless,indeed, i run the chances of a court-martial, or unless you and my fatherwould come to spain.\" he threw out this last suggestion as a kind offeeler; and then suddenly made the plunge. \"you don\"t know how i wishyou would. i have a good position--the chance of a better,\" continued he,reddening like a girl. \"that dolores barbour that i was telling you of,margaret--i only wish you knew her; i am sure you would like--no, loveis the right word, like is so poor--you would love her, father, if youknew her. she is not eighteen; but if she is in the same mind anotheryear, she is to be my wife. mr. barbour won\"t let us call it anengagement. but if you would come, you would find friendseverywhere, besides dolores. think of it, father. margaret, be on myside.\"
　　\"no--no more removals for me,\" said mr. hale. \"one removal has costme my wife. no more removals in this life. she will be here; and herewill i stay out my appointed time.\"
　　\"oh, frederick,\" said margaret, \"tell us more about her. i never thoughtof this; but i am so glad. you will have some one to love and care foryou out there. tell us all about it.\"
　　\"in the first place, she is a roman catholic. that\"s the only objection ianticipated. but my father\"s change of opinion--nay, margaret, don\"tsigh.\"
　　margaret had reason to sigh a little more before the conversation ended.
　　frederick himself was roman catholic in fact, though not in professionas yet. this was, then, the reason why his sympathy in her extreme
　　distress at her father\"s leaving the church had been so faintly expressedin his letters. she had thought it was the carelessness of a sailor; but thetruth was, that even then he was himself inclined to give up the form ofreligion into which he had been baptised, only that his opinions weretending in exactly the opposite direction to those of his father. howmuch love had to do with this change not even frederick himself couldhave told. margaret gave up talking about this branch of the subject atlast; and, returning to the fact of the engagement, she began to considerit in some fresh light:
.  



第106章 CHAPTER VI \"SHOULD AULD ACQUAINTANCE BE FORGOT?\" (


　　\"but for her sake, fred, you surely will try and clear yourself of theexaggerated charges brought against you, even if the charge of mutinyitself be true. if there were to be a court-martial, and you could findyour witnesses, you might, at any rate, show how your disobedience toauthority was because that authority was unworthily exercised.\"
　　mr. hale roused himself up to listen to his son\"s answer.
　　\"in the first place, margaret, who is to hunt up my witnesses? all ofthem are sailors, drafted off to other ships, except those whose evidencewould go for very little, as they took part, or sympathised in the affair.
　　in the next place, allow me to tell you, you don\"t know what a court-martial is, and consider it as an assembly where justice is administered,instead of what it really is--a court where authority weighs nine-tenthsin the balance, and evidence forms only the other tenth. in such cases,evidence itself can hardly escape being influenced by the prestige ofauthority.\"
　　\"but is it not worth trying, to see how much evidence might bediscovered and arrayed on your behalf? at present, all those who knewyou formerly, believe you guilty without any shadow of excuse. youhave never tried to justify yourself, and we have never known where toseek for proofs of your justification. now, for miss barbour\"s sake,make your conduct as clear as you can in the eye of the world. she maynot care for it; she has, i am sure, that trust in you that we all have; butyou ought not to let her ally herself to one under such a serious charge,without showing the world exactly how it is you stand. you disobeyedauthority--that was bad; but to have stood by, without word or act,while the authority was brutally used, would have been infinitely worse.
　　people know what you did; but not the motives that elevate it out of acrime into an heroic protection of the weak. for dolores\" sake, theyought to know.\"
　　\"but how must i make them know? i am not sufficiently sure of thepurity and justice of those who would be my judges, to give myself upto a court-martial, even if i could bring a whole array of truth-speakingwitnesses. i can\"t send a bellman about, to cry aloud and proclaim in thestreets what you are pleased to call my heroism. no one would read a
　　pamphlet of self-justification so long after the deed, even if i put oneout.\"
　　\"will you consult a lawyer as to your chances of exculpation?\" askedmargaret, looking up, and turning very red.
　　\"i must first catch my lawyer, and have a look at him, and see how i likehim, before i make him into my confidant. many a briefless barristermight twist his conscience into thinking, that he could earn a hundredpounds very easily by doing a good action--in giving me, a criminal, upto justice.\"
　　\"nonsense, frederick!--because i know a lawyer on whose honour i canrely; of whose cleverness in his profession people speak very highly;and who would, i think, take a good deal of trouble for any of--of auntshaw\"s relations mr. henry lennox, papa.\"
　　\"i think it is a good idea,\" said mr. hale. \"but don\"t propose anythingwhich will detain frederick in england. don\"t, for your mother\"s sake.\"
　　\"you could go to london to-morrow evening by a night-train,\"
　　continued margaret, warming up into her plan. \"he must go to-morrow,i\"m afraid, papa,\" said she, tenderly; \"we fixed that, because of mr. bell,and dixon\"s disagreeable acquaintance.\"
　　\"yes; i must go to-morrow,\" said frederick decidedly.
　　mr. hale groaned. \"i can\"t bear to part with you, and yet i am miserablewith anxiety as long as you stop here.\"
　　\"well then,\" said margaret, \"listen to my plan. he gets to london onfriday morning. i will--you might--no! it would be better for me to givehim a note to mr. lennox. you will find him at his chambers in thetemple.\"
　　\"i will write down a list of all the names i can remember on board theorion. i could leave it with him to ferret them out. he is edith\"shusband\"s brother, isn\"t he? i remember your naming him in your letters.
　　i have money in barbour\"s hands. i can pay a pretty long bill, if there isany chance of success money, dear father, that i had meant for adifferent purpose; so i shall only consider it as borrowed from you andmargaret.\"
　　\"don\"t do that,\" said margaret. \"you won\"t risk it if you do. and it will bea risk only it is worth trying. you can sail from london as well as fromliverpool?\"
　　\"to be sure, little goose. wherever i feel water heaving under a plank,there i feel at home. i\"ll pick up some craft or other to take me off, neverfear. i won\"t stay twenty-four hours in london, away from you on theone hand, and from somebody else on the other.\"
　　it was rather a comfort to margaret that frederick took it into his headto look over her shoulder as she wrote to mr. lennox. if she had notbeen thus compelled to write steadily and concisely on, she might have
　　hesitated over many a word, and been puzzled to choose between manyan expression, in the awkwardness of being the first to resume theintercourse of which the concluding event had been so unpleasant toboth sides. however, the note was taken from her before she had evenhad time to look it over, and treasured up in a pocket-book, out ofwhich fell a long lock of black hair, the sight of which causedfrederick\"s eyes to glow with pleasure.
　　\"now you would like to see that, wouldn\"t you?\" said he. \"no! you mustwait till you see her herself she is too perfect to be known byfragments. no mean brick shall be a specimen of the building of mypalace.\"
下*书 网



第107章 CHAPTER VII MISCHANCES (1)


　　\"what! remain to bedenounced--dragged, it may be, in chains.\"
　　werner.
　　all the next day they sate together--they three. mr. hale hardly everspoke but when his children asked him questions, and forced him, as itwere, into the present. frederick\"s grief was no more to be seen orheard; the first paroxysm had passed over, and now he was ashamed ofhaving been so battered down by emotion; and though his sorrow forthe loss of his mother was a deep real feeling, and would last out hislife, it was never to be spoken of again. margaret, not so passionate atfirst, was more suffering now. at times she cried a good deal; and hermanner, even when speaking on indifferent things, had a mournfultenderness about it, which was deepened whenever her looks fell onfrederick, and she thought of his rapidly approaching departure. shewas glad he was going, on her father\"s account, however much shemight grieve over it on her own. the anxious terror in which mr. halelived lest his son should be detected and captured, far out-weighed thepleasure he derived from his presence. the nervousness had increasedsince mrs. hale\"s death, probably because he dwelt upon it moreexclusively. he started at every unusual sound; and was never
　　comfortable unless frederick sate out of the immediate view of any oneentering the room. towards evening he said:
　　\"you will go with frederick to the station, margaret? i shall want toknow he is safely off. you will bring me word that he is clear of milton,at any rate?\"
　　\"certainly,\" said margaret. \"i shall like it, if you won\"t be lonely withoutme, papa.\"
　　\"no, no! i should always be fancying some one had known him, and thathe had been stopped, unless you could tell me you had seen him off.
　　and go to the outwood station. it is quite as near, and not so manypeople about. take a cab there. there is less risk of his being seen.
　　what time is your train, fred?\"
　　\"ten minutes past six; very nearly dark. so what will you do, margaret?\"
　　\"oh, i can manage. i am getting very brave and very hard. it is a well-lighted road all the way home, if it should be dark. but i was out lastweek much later.\"
　　margaret was thankful when the parting was over--the parting from thedead mother and the living father. she hurried frederick into the cab, inorder to shorten a scene which she saw was so bitterly painful to herfather, who would accompany his son as he took his last look at hismother. partly in consequence of this, and partly owing to one of thevery common mistakes in the \"railway guide\" as to the times whentrains arrive at the smaller stations, they found, on reaching outwood,that they had nearly twenty minutes to spare. the booking-office wasnot open, so they could not even take the ticket. they accordingly wentdown the flight of steps that led to the level of the ground below therailway. there was a broad cinder-path diagonally crossing a fieldwhich lay along-side of the carriage-road, and they went there to walkbackwards and forwards for the few minutes they had to spare.
　　margaret\"s hand lay in frederick\"s arm. he took hold of itaffectionately.
　　\"margaret! i am going to consult mr. lennox as to the chance ofexculpating myself, so that i may return to england whenever i choose,more for your sake than for the sake of any one else. i can\"t bear tothink of your lonely position if anything should happen to my father. helooks sadly changed--terribly shaken. i wish you could get him to thinkof the cadiz plan, for manyreasons. what could you do if he were takenaway? you have nofriend near. we are curiously bare of relations.\"
　　margaret could hardly keep from crying at the tender anxiety withwhich frederick was bringing before her an event which she herself feltwas not very improbable, so severely had the cares of the last fewmonths told upon mr. hale. but she tried to rally as she said:
　　\"there have been such strange unexpected changes in my life during
　　these last two years, that i feel more than ever that it is not worth whileto calculate too closely what i should do if any future event took place.
　　i try to think only upon the present.\" she paused; they were standing stillfor a moment, close on the field side of the stile leading into the road;the setting sun fell on their faces. frederick held her hand in his, andlooked with wistful anxiety into her face, reading there more care andtrouble than she would betray by words. she went on:
　　\"we shall write often to one another, and i will promise--for i see it willset your mind at ease--to tell you every worry i have. papa is\"--shestarted a little, a hardly visible start--but frederick felt the suddenmotion of the hand he held, and turned his full face to the road, alongwhich a horseman was slowly riding, just passing the very stile wherethey stood. margaret bowed; her bow was stiffly returned.
　　\"who is that?\" said frederick, almost before he was out ofhearing.margaret was a little drooping, a little flushed, as she replied:
　　\"mr. thornton; you saw him before, you know.\"
　　\"only his back. he is an unprepossessing-looking fellow. what a scowlhe has!\"
　　\"something has happened to vex him,\" said margaret, apologetically.
　　\"you would not have thought him unprepossessing if you had seen himwith mamma.\"
www.xiabook.comwww.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ



第108章 CHAPTER VII MISCHANCES (2)


　　\"i fancy it must be time to go and take my ticket. if i had known howdark it would be, we wouldn\"t have sent back the cab, margaret.\"
　　\"oh, don\"t fidget about that. i can take a cab here, if i like; or go back bythe rail-road, when i should have shops and people and lamps all theway from the milton station-house. don\"t think of me; take care ofyourself. i am sick with the thought that leonards may be in the sametrain with you. look well into the carriage before you get in.\"
　　they went back to the station. margaret insisted upon going into thefull light of the flaring gas inside to take the ticket. some idle-lookingyoung men were lounging about with the stationmaster. margaretthought she had seen the face of one of them before, and returned him aproud look of offended dignity for his somewhat impertinent stare ofundisguised admiration. she went hastily to her brother, who wasstanding outside, and took hold of his arm. \"have you got your bag? letus walk about here on the platform,\" said she, a little flurried at the ideaof so soon being left alone, and her bravery oozing out rather faster thanshe liked to acknowledge even to herself. she heard a step followingthem along the flags; it stopped when they stopped, looking out alongthe line and hearing the whizz of the coming train. they did not speak;their hearts were too full. another moment, and the train would be here;a minute more, and he would be gone. margaret almost repented theurgency with which she had entreated him to go to london; it was
　　throwing more chances of detection in his way. if he had sailed forspain by liverpool, he might have been off in two or three hours.
　　frederick turned round, right facing the lamp, where the gas darted upin vivid anticipation of the train. a man in the dress of a railway porterstarted forward; a bad-looking man, who seemed to have drunk himselfinto a state of brutality, although his senses were in perfect order.
　　\"by your leave, miss!\" said he, pushing margaret rudely on one side, andseizing frederick by the collar.
　　\"your name is hale, i believe?\"
　　in an instant--how, margaret did not see, for everything danced beforeher eyes--but by some sleight of wrestling, frederick had tripped himup, and he fell from the height of three or four feet, which the platformwas elevated above the space of soft ground, by the side of the railroad.
　　there he lay.
　　\"run, run!\" gasped margaret. \"the train is here. it was leonards, was it?
　　oh, run! i will carry your bag.\" and she took him by the arm to push himalong with all her feeble force. a door was opened in a carriage--hejumped in; and as he leant out t say, \"god bless you, margaret!\" the trainrushed past her; an she was left standing alone. she was so terribly sickand faint that she was thankful to he able to turn into the ladies\" waiting-room, and sit down for an instant. at first she could do nothing but gaspfor breath. it was such a hurry; such a sickening alarm; such a nearchance. if the train had not been there at the moment, the man wouldhave jumped up again and called for assistance to arrest him. shewondered if the man had got up: she tried to remember if she had seenhim move; she wondered if he could have been seriously hurt. sheventured out; the platform was all alight, but still quite deserted; shewent to the end, and looked over, somewhat fearfully. no one wasthere; and then she was glad she had made herself go, and inspect, forotherwise terrible thoughts would have haunted her dreams. and evenas it was, she was so trembling and affrighted that she felt she could notwalk home along the road, which did indeed seem lonely and dark, asshe gazed down upon it from the blaze of the station. she would waittill the down train passed and take her seat in it. but what if leonardsrecognised her as frederick\"s companion! she peered about, beforeventuring into the booking-office to take her ticket. there were onlysome railway officials standing about; and talking loud to one another.
　　\"so leonards has been drinking again!\" said one, seemingly in authority.
　　\"he\"ll need all his boasted influence to keep his place this time.\"
　　\"where is he?\" asked another, while margaret, her back towards them,was counting her change with trembling fingers, not daring to turnround until she heard the answer to this question.
　　\"i don\"t know. he came in not five minutes ago, with some long story or
　　other about a fall he\"d had, swearing awfully; and wanted to borrowsome money from me to go to london by the next up-train. he made allsorts of tipsy promises, but i\"d something else to do than listen to him; itold him to go about his business; and he went off at the front door.\"
　　\"he\"s at the nearest vaults, i\"ll be bound,\" said the first speaker. \"yourmoney would have gone there too, if you\"d been such a fool as to lendit.\"
　　\"catch me! i knew better what his london meant. why, he has neverpaid me off that five shillings\"--and so they went on.
　　and now all margaret\"s anxiety was for the train to come. she hidherself once more in the ladies\" waiting-room, and fancied every noisewas leonards\" step--every loud and boisterous voice was his. but noone came near her until the train drew up; when she was civilly helpedinto a carriage by a porter, into whose face she durst not look till theywere in motion, and then she saw that it was not leonards\".




第109章 CHAPTER VIII PEACE (1)


　　\"sleep on, my love, in thy cold bed,never to be disquieted!
　　my last good night--thou wilt not waketill i thy fate shall overtake.\"
　　dr. king.
　　home seemed unnaturally quiet after all this terror and noisycommotion. her father had seen all due preparation made for herrefreshment on her return; and then sate down again in his accustomedchair, to fall into one of his sad waking dreams. dixon had got maryhiggins to scold and direct in the kitchen; and her scolding was not theless energetic because it was delivered in an angry whisper; for,speaking above her breath she would have thought irreverent, as long asthere was any one dead lying in the house. margaret had resolved not tomention the crowning and closing affright to her father. there was no
　　use in speaking about it; it had ended well; the only thing to be fearedwas lest leonards should in some way borrow money enough to effecthis purpose of following frederick to london, and hunting him outthere. but there were immense chances against the success of any suchplan; and margaret determined not to torment herself by thinking ofwhat she could do nothing to prevent. frederick would be as much onhis guard as she could put him; and in a day or two at most he would besafely out of england.
　　\"i suppose we shall hear from mr. bell to-morrow,\" said margaret.
　　\"yes,\" replied her father. \"i suppose so.\"
　　\"if he can come, he will be here to-morrow evening, i should think.\"
　　\"if he cannot come, i shall ask mr. thornton to go with me to thefuneral. i cannot go alone. i should break down utterly.\"
　　\"don\"t ask mr. thornton, papa. let me go with you,\" said margaret,impetuously.
　　\"you! my dear, women do not generally go.\"
　　\"no: because they can\"t control themselves. women of our class don\"tgo, because they have no power over their emotions, and yet areashamed of showing them. poor women go, and don\"t care if they areseen overwhelmed with grief. but i promise you, papa, that if you willlet me go, i will be no trouble. don\"t have a stranger, and leave me out.
　　dear papa! if mr. bell cannot come, i shall go. i won\"t urge my wishagainst your will, if he does.\"
　　mr. bell could not come. he had the gout. it was a most affectionateletter, and expressed great and true regret for his inability to attend. hehoped to come and pay them a visit soon, if they would have him; hismilton property required some looking after, and his agent had writtento him to say that his presence was absolutely necessary; or else he hadavoided coming near milton as long as he could, and now the only thingthat would reconcile him to this necessary visit was the idea that heshould see, and might possibly be able to comfort his old friend.
　　margaret had all the difficulty in the world to persuade her father not toinvite mr. thornton. she had an indescribable repugnance to this stepbeing taken. the night before the funeral, came a stately note from mrs.
　　thornton to miss hale, saying that, at her son\"s desire, their carriageshould attend the funeral, if it would not be disagreeable to the family.
　　margaret tossed the note to her father.
　　\"oh, don\"t let us have these forms,\" said she. \"let us go alone--you andme, papa. they don\"t care for us, or else he would have offered to gohimself, and not have proposed this sending an empty carriage.\"
　　\"i thought you were so extremely averse to his going, margaret,\" saidmr. hale in some surprise.
　　\"and so i am. i don\"t want him to come at all; and i should especially
　　dislike the idea of our asking him. but this seems such a mockery ofmourning that i did not expect it from him.\" she startled her father bybursting into tears. she had been so subdued in her grief, so thoughtfulfor others, so gentle and patient in all things, that he could notunderstand her impatient ways to-night; she seemed agitated andrestless; and at all the tenderness which her father in his turn nowlavished upon her, she only cried the more.




第110章 CHAPTER VIII PEACE (2)


　　she passed so bad a night that she was ill prepared for the additionalanxiety caused by a letter received from frederick. mr. lennox was outof town; his clerk said that he would return by the following tuesday atthe latest; that he might possibly be at home on monday. consequently,after some consideration, frederick had determined upon remaining inlondon a day or two longer. he had thought of coming down to miltonagain; the temptation had been very strong; but the idea of mr. belldomesticated in his father\"s house, and the alarm he had received at thelast moment at the railway station, had made him resolve to stay inlondon. margaret might be assured he would take every precautionagainst being tracked by leonards. margaret was thankful that shereceived this letter while her father was absent in her mother\"s room. ifhe had been present, he would have expected her to read it aloud to him,and it would have raised in him a state of nervous alarm which shewould have found it impossible to soothe away. there was not merelythe fact, which disturbed her excessively, of frederick\"s detention inlondon, but there were allusions to the recognition at the last momentat milton, and the possibility of a pursuit, which made her blood runcold; and how then would it have affected her father? many a time didmargaret repent of having suggested and urged on the plan ofconsulting mr. lennox. at the moment, it had seemed as if it wouldoccasion so little delay--add so little to the apparently small chances ofdetection; and yet everything that had since occurred had tended tomake it so undesirable. margaret battled hard against this regret of hersfor what could not now be helped; this self-reproach for having saidwhat had at thetime appeared to be wise, but which after events wereproving to have been so foolish. but her father was in too depressed astate of mind and body to struggle healthily; he would succumb to allthese causes for morbid regret over what could not be recalled.
　　margaret summoned up all her forces to her aid. her father seemed tohave forgotten that they had any reason to expect a letter from frederickthat morning. he was absorbed in one idea--that the last visible token ofthe presence of his wife was to be carried away from him, and hiddenfrom his sight. he trembled pitifully as the undertaker\"s man wasarranging his crape draperies around him. he looked wistfully atmargaret; and, when released, he tottered towards her, murmuring,
　　\"pray for me, margaret. i have no strength left in me. i cannot pray. igive her up because i must. i try to bear it: indeed i do. i know it isgod\"s will. but i cannot see why she died. pray for me, margaret, that imay have faith to pray. it is a great strait, my child.\"
　　margaret sat by him in the coach, almost supporting him in her arms;and repeating all the noble verses of holy comfort, or texts expressive offaithful resignation, that she could remember. her voice never faltered;and she herself gained strength by doing this. her father\"s lips movedafter her, repeating the well-known texts as her words suggested them;it was terrible to see the patient struggling effort to obtain theresignation which he had not strength to take into his heart as a part ofhimself.
　　margaret\"s fortitude nearly gave way as dixon, with a slight motion ofher hand, directed her notice to nicholas higgins and his daughter,standing a little aloof, but deeply attentive to the ceremonial. nicholaswore his usual fustian clothes, but had a bit of black stuff sewn roundhis hat--a mark of mourning which he had never shown to his daughterbessy\"s memory. but mr. hale saw nothing. he went on repeating tohimself, mechanically as it were, all the funeral service as it was read bythe officiating clergyman; he sighed twice or thrice when all was ended;and then, putting his hand on margaret\"s arm, he mutely entreated to beled away, as if he were blind, and she his faithful guide.
　　dixon sobbed aloud; she covered her face with her handkerchief, andwas so absorbed in her own grief, that she did not perceive that thecrowd, attracted on such occasions, was dispersing, till she was spokento by some one close at hand. it was mr. thornton. he had been presentall the time, standing, with bent head, behind a group of people, so that,in fact, no one had recognised him.
　　\"i beg your pardon,--but, can you tell me how mr. hale is? and misshale, too? i should like to know how they both are.\"
　　\"of course, sir. they are much as is to be expected. master is terriblybroke down. miss hale bears up better than likely.\"
　　mr. thornton would rather have heard that she was suffering the naturalsorrow. in the first place, there was selfishness enough in him to havetaken pleasure in the idea that his great love might come in to comfortand console her; much the same kind of strange passionate pleasurewhich comes stinging through a mother\"s heart, when her droopinginfant nestles close to her, and is dependent upon her for everything.
　　but this delicious vision of what might have been--in which, in spite ofall margaret\"s repulse, he would have indulged only a few days ago-wasmiserably disturbed by the recollection of what he had seen nearthe outwood station. \"miserably disturbed!\" that is not strong enough.
　　he was haunted by the remembrance of the handsome young man, with
　　whom she stood in an attitude of such familiar confidence; and theremembrance shot through him like an agony, till it made him clenchhis hands tight in order to subdue the pain. at that late hour, so far fromhome! it took a great moral effort to galvanise his trust--erewhile soperfect--in margaret\"s pure and exquisite maidenliness, into life; as soonas the effort ceased, his trust dropped down dead and powerless: and allsorts of wild fancies chased each other like dreams through his mind.
　　here was a little piece of miserable, gnawing confirmation. \"she bore upbetter than likely\" under this grief. she had then some hope to look to,so bright that even in her affectionate nature it could come in to lightenthe dark hours of a daughter newly made motherless. yes! he knew howshe would love. he had not loved her without gaining that instinctiveknowledge of what capabilities were in her. her soul would walk inglorious sunlight if any man was worthy, by his power of loving, to winback her love. even in her mourning she would rest with a peacefulfaith upon his sympathy. his sympathy! whose? that other man\"s. andthat it was another was enough to make mr. thornton\"s pale grave facegrow doubly wan and stern at dixon\"s answer.
　　\"i suppose i may call,\" said he coldly. \"on mr. hale, i mean. he willperhaps admit me after to-morrow or so.\"
　　he spoke as if the answer were a matter of indifference to him. but itwas not so. for all his pain, he longed to see the author of it. althoughhe hated margaret at times, when he thought of that gentle familiarattitude and all the attendant circumstances, he had a restless desire torenew her picture in his mind--a longing for the very atmosphere shebreathed. he was in the charybdis of passion, and must perforce circleand circle ever nearer round the fatal centre.
　　\"i dare say, sir, master will see you. he was very sorry to have to denyyou the other day; but circumstances was not agreeable just then.\"
　　for some reason or other, dixon never named this interview that shehad had with mr. thornton to margaret. it might have been merechance, but so it was that margaret never heard that he had attended herpoor mother\"s funeral.
www.ｌzuoＷeＮ．ＣＯＭ



第111章 CHAPTER IX FALSE AND TRUE (1)


　　\"truth will fail thee never, never!
　　though thy bark be tempest-driven,though each plank be rent and riven,truth will bear thee on for ever!\"
　　anon.
　　the \"bearing up better than likely\" was a terrible strain upon margaret.
　　sometimes she thought she must give way, and cry out with pain, as thesudden sharp thought came across her, even during her apparentlycheerful conversations with her father, that she had no longer a mother.
　　about frederick, too, there was great uneasiness. the sunday postintervened, and interfered with their london letters; and on tuesdaymargaret was surprised and disheartened to find that there was still noletter. she was quite in the dark as to his plans, and her father wasmiserable at all this uncertainty. it broke in upon his lately acquiredhabit of sitting still in one easy chair for half a day together. he keptpacing up and down the room; then out of it; and she heard him uponthe landing opening and shutting the bed-room doors, without anyapparent object. she tried to tranquillise him by reading aloud; but itwas evident he could not listen for long together. how thankful she wasthen, that she had kept to herself the additional cause for anxietyproduced by their encounter with leonards. she was thankful to hearmr. thornton announced. his visit would force her father\"s thoughtsinto another channel.
　　he came up straight to her father, whose hands he took and wrungwithout a word--holding them in his for a minute or two, during whichtime his face, his eyes, his look, told of more sympathy than could beput into words. then he turned to margaret. not \"better than likely\" didshe look. her stately beauty was dimmed with much watching and withmany tears. the expression on her countenance was of gentle patientsadness--nay of positive present suffering. he had not meant to greether otherwise than with his late studied coldness of demeanour; but hecould not help going up to her, as she stood a little aside, rendered timidby the uncertainty of his manner of late, and saying the few necessarycommon-place words in so tender a voice, that her eyes filled withtears, and she turned away to hide her emotion. she took her work andsate down very quiet and silent. mr. thornton\"s heart beat quick andstrong, and for the time he utterly forgot the outwood lane. he tried totalk to mr. hale: and--his presence always a certain kind of pleasure tomr. hale, as his power and decision made him, and his opinions, a safe,
　　sure port--was unusually agreeable to her father, as margaret saw.
　　presently dixon came to the door and said, \"miss hale, you are wanted.\"
　　dixon\"s manner was so flurried that margaret turned sick at heart.
　　something had happened to fred. she had no doubt of that. it was wellthat her father and mr. thornton were so much occupied by theirconversation.
　　\"what is it, dixon?\" asked margaret, the moment she had shut thedrawing-room door.
　　\"come this way, miss,\" said dixon, opening the door of what had beenmrs. hale\"s bed-chamber, now margaret\"s, for her father refused tosleep there again after his wife\"s death. \"it\"s nothing, miss,\" said dixon,choking a little. \"only a police-inspector. he wants to see you, miss. buti dare say, it\"s about nothing at all.\"
　　\"did he name--\" asked margaret, almost inaudibly.
　　\"no, miss; he named nothing. he only asked if you lived here, and if hecould speak to you. martha went to the door, and let him in; she hasshown him into master\"s study. i went to him myself, to try if that woulddo; but no--it\"s you, miss, he wants.\"
　　margaret did not speak again till her hand was on the lock of the studydoor. here she turned round and said, \"take care papa does not comedown. mr. thornton is with him now.\"
　　the inspector was almost daunted by the haughtiness of her manner asshe entered. there was something of indignation expressed in hercountenance, but so kept down and controlled, that it gave her a superbair of disdain. there was no surprise, no curiosity. she stood awaitingthe opening of his business there. not a question did she ask.
　　\"i beg your pardon, ma\"am, but my duty obliges me to ask you a fewplain questions. a man has died at the infirmary, in consequence of afall, received at outwood station, between the hours of five and six onthursday evening, the twenty-sixth instant. at the time, this fall did notseem of much consequence; but it was rendered fatal, the doctors say,by the presence of some internal complaint, and the man\"s own habit ofdrinking.\"
　　the large dark eyes, gazing straight into the inspector\"s face, dilated alittle. otherwise there was no motion perceptible to his experiencedobservation. her lips swelled out into a richer curve than ordinary,owing to the enforced tension of the muscles, but he did not know whatwas their usual appearance, so as to recognise the unwonted sullendefiance of the firm sweeping lines. she never blenched or trembled.
　　she fixed him with her eye. now--as he paused before going on, shesaid, almost as if she would encourage him in telling his tale--\"well--goon!\"
www.xiabook.com



第112章 CHAPTER IX FALSE AND TRUE (2)


　　\"it is supposed that an inquest will have to be held; there is some slight
　　evidence to prove that the blow, or push, or scuffle that caused the fall,was provoked by this poor fellow\"s half-tipsy impertinence to a younglady, walking with the man who pushed the deceased over the edge ofthe platform. this much was observed by some one on the platform,who, however, thought no more about the matter, as the blow seemed ofslight consequence. there is also some reason to identify the lady withyourself; in which case--\"
　　\"i was not there,\" said margaret, still keeping her expressionless eyesfixed on his face, with the unconscious look of a sleep-walker.
　　the inspector bowed but did not speak. the lady standing before himshowed no emotion, no fluttering fear, no anxiety, no desire to end theinterview. the information he had received was very vague; one of theporters, rushing out to be in readiness for the train, had seen a scuffle, atthe other end of the platform, between leonards and a gentlemanaccompanied by a lady, but heard no noise; and before the train had gotto its full speed after starting, he had been almost knocked down by theheadlong run of the enraged half intoxicated leonards, swearing andcursing awfully. he had not thought any more about it, till his evidencewas routed out by the inspector, who, on making some farther inquiry atthe railroad station, had heard from the station-master that a young ladyand gentleman had been there about that hour--the lady remarkablyhandsome--and said, by some grocer\"s assistant present at the time, tobe a miss hale, living at crampton, whose family dealt at his shop.
　　there was no certainty that the one lady and gentleman were identicalwith the other pair, but there was great probability. leonards himselfhad gone, half-mad with rage and pain, to the nearest gin-palace forcomfort; and his tipsy words had not been attended to by the busywaiters there; they, however, remembered his starting up and cursinghimself for not having sooner thought of the electric telegraph, for somepurpose unknown; and they believed that he left with the idea of goingthere. on his way, overcome by pain or drink, he had lain down in theroad, where the police had found him and taken him to the infirmary:
　　there he had never recovered sufficient consciousness to give anydistinct account of his fall, although once or twice he had hadglimmerings of sense sufficient to make the authorities send for thenearest magistrate, in hopes that he might be able to take down thedying man\"s deposition of the cause of his death. but when themagistrate had come, he was rambling about being at sea, and mixingup names of captains and lieutenants in an indistinct manner with thoseof his fellow porters at the railway; and his last words were a curse onthe \"cornish trick\" which had, he said, made him a hundred poundspoorer than he ought to have been. the inspector ran all this over in hismind--the vagueness of the evidence to prove that margaret had been at
　　the station--the unflinching, calm denial which she gave to such asupposition. she stood awaiting his next word with a composure thatappeared supreme.
　　\"then, madam, i have your denial that you were the lady accompanyingthe gentleman who struck the blow, or gave the push, which caused thedeath of this poor man?\"
　　a quick, sharp pain went through margaret\"s brain. \"oh god! that iknew frederick were safe!\" a deep observer of human countenancesmight have seen the momentary agony shoot out of her great gloomyeyes, like the torture of some creature brought to bay. but the inspectorthough a very keen, was not a very deep observer. he was a little struck,notwithstanding, by the form of the answer, which sounded like amechanical repetition of her first reply--not changed and modified inshape so as to meet his last question.
　　\"i was not there,\" said she, slowly and heavily. and all this time shenever closed her eyes, or ceased from that glassy, dream-like stare. hisquick suspicions were aroused by this dull echo of her former denial. itwas as if she had forced herself to one untruth, and had been stunnedout of all power of varying it.
　　he put up his book of notes in a very deliberate manner. then helooked up; she had not moved any more than if she had been some greategyptian statue.
　　\"i hope you will not think me impertinent when i say, that i may have tocall on you again. i may have to summon you to appear on the inquest,and prove an alibi, if my witnesses\" (it was but one who had recognisedher) \"persist in deposing to your presence at the unfortunate event.\" helooked at her sharply. she was still perfectly quiet--no change of colour,or darker shadow of guilt, on her proud face. he thought to have seenher wince: he did not know margaret hale. he was a little abashed byher regal composure. it must have been a mistake of identity. he wenton:
　　\"it is very unlikely, ma\"am, that i shall have to do anything of the kind. ihope you will excuse me for doing what is only my duty, although itmay appear impertinent.\"
　　margaret bowed her head as he went towards the door. her lips werestiff and dry. she could not speak even the common words of farewell.
　　but suddenly she walked forwards, and opened the study door, andpreceded him to the door of the house, which she threw wide open forhis exit. she kept her eyes upon him in the same dull, fixed manner,until he was fairly out of the house. she shut the door, and went halfwayinto the study; then turned back, as if moved by some passionateimpulse, and locked the door inside.
　　then she went into the study, paused--tottered forward--paused again-
　　swayed for an instant where she stood, and fell prone on the floor in adead swoon.
www.xiabook.com下 //书 //网



第113章 CHAPTER X EXPIATION (1)


　　\"there\"s nought so finely spunbut it cometh to the sun.\"
　　mr. thornton sate on and on. he felt that his company gave pleasure tomr. hale; and was touched by the half-spoken wishful entreaty that hewould remain a little longer--the plaintive \"don\"t go yet,\" which his poorfriend put forth from time to time. he wondered margaret did notreturn; but it was with no view of seeing her that he lingered. for thehour--and in the presence of one who was so thoroughly feeling thenothingness of earth--he was reasonable and self-controlled. he wasdeeply interested in all her father said\"of death, and of the heavy lull,and of the brain that has grown dull.\"
　　it was curious how the presence of mr. thornton had power over mr.
　　hale to make him unlock the secret thoughts which he kept shut upeven from margaret. whether it was that her sympathy would be sokeen, and show itself in so lively a manner, that he was afraid of thereaction upon himself, or whether it was that to his speculative mind allkinds of doubts presented themselves at such a time, pleading andcrying aloud to be resolved into certainties, and that he knew she wouldhave shrunk from the expression of any such doubts--nay, from himhimself as capable of conceiving them--whatever was the reason, hecould unburden himself better to mr. thornton than to her of all thethoughts and fancies and fears that had been frost-bound in his brain tillnow. mr. thornton said very little; but every sentence he uttered addedto mr. hale\"s reliance and regard for him. was it that he paused in theexpression of some remembered agony, mr. thornton\"s two or threewords would complete the sentence, and show how deeply its meaningwas entered into. was it a doubt--a fear--a wandering uncertaintyseeking rest, but finding none--so tear-blinded were its eyes--mr.
　　thornton, instead of being shocked, seemed to have passed through thatvery stage of thought himself, and could suggest where the exact ray oflight was to be found, which should make the dark places plain. man ofaction as he was, busy in the world\"s great battle, there was a deeperreligion binding him to god in his heart, in spite of his strongwilfulness, through all his mistakes, than mr. hale had ever dreamed.
　　they never spoke of such things again, as it happened; but this oneconversation made them peculiar people to each other; knit themtogether, in a way which no loose indiscriminate talking about sacredthings can ever accomplish. when all are admitted, how can there be aholy of holies?
　　and all this while, margaret lay as still and white as death on the studyfloor! she had sunk under her burden. it had been heavy in weight andlong carried; and she had been very meek and patient, till all at once herfaith had given way, and she had groped in vain for help! there was apitiful contraction of suffering upon her beautiful brows, although therewas no other sign of consciousness remaining. the mouth--a little whileago, so sullenly projected in defiance--was relaxed and livid.
　　\"e par che de la sua labbia si movauno spirto soave e pien d\"amore,chi va dicendo a l\"anima: sospira!\"
　　the first symptom of returning life was a quivering about the lips--alittle mute soundless attempt at speech; but the eyes were still closed;and the quivering sank into stillness. then, feebly leaning on her armsfor an instant to steady herself, margaret gathered herself up, and rose.
　　her comb had fallen out of her hair; and with an intuitive desire toefface the traces of weakness, and bring herself into order again, shesought for it, although from time to time, in the course of the search,she had to sit down and recover strength. her head drooped forwards-herhands meekly laid one upon the other--she tried to recall the force ofher temptation, by endeavouring to remember the details which hadthrown her into such deadly fright; but she could not. she onlyunderstood two facts--that frederick had been in danger of beingpursued and detected in london, as not only guilty of manslaughter, butas the more unpardonable leader of the mutiny, and that she had lied tosave him. there was one comfort; her lie had saved him, if only bygaining some additional time. if the inspector came again to-morrow,after she had received the letter she longed for to assure her of herbrother\"s safety, she would brave shame, and stand in her bitter penance-she, the lofty margaret--acknowledging before a crowded justice-room,if need were, that she had been as \"a dog, and done this thing.\" but if hecame before she heard from frederick; if he returned, as he had halfthreatened, in a few hours, why! she would tell that lie again; though
　　how the words would come out, after all this terrible pause forreflection and self-reproach, without betraying her falsehood, she didnot know, she could not tell. but her repetition of it would gain time-timefor frederick.
　　she was roused by dixon\"s entrance into the room; she had just beenletting out mr. thornton.
　　he had hardly gone ten steps in the street, before a passing omnibusstopped close by him, and a man got down, and came up to him,touching his hat as he did so. it was the police-inspector.
　　mr. thornton had obtained for him his first situation in the police, andhad heard from time to time of the progress of his protege, but they hadnot often met, and at first mr. thornton did not remember him.
　　\"my name is watson--george watson, sir, that you got----\"
　　\"ah, yes! i recollect. why you are getting on famously, i hear.\"
　　\"yes, sir. i ought to thank you, sir. but it is on a little matter of businessi made so bold as to speak to you now. i believe you were themagistrate who attended to take down the deposition of a poor man whodied in the infirmary last night.\"
　　\"yes,\" replied mr. thornton. \"i went and heard some kind of a ramblingstatement, which the clerk said was of no great use. i\"m afraid he wasbut a drunken fellow, though there is no doubt he came to his death byviolence at last. one of my mother\"s servants was engaged to him, ibelieve, and she is in great distress to-day. what about him?\"
　　\"why, sir, his death is oddly mixed up with somebody in the house isaw you coming out of just now; it was a mr. hale\"s, i believe.\"
　　\"yes!\" said mr. thornton, turning sharp round and looking into theinspector\"s face with sudden interest. \"what about it?\"
www、mdwenxue.com



第114章 CHAPTER X EXPIATION (2)


　　\"why, sir, it seems to me that i have got a pretty distinct chain ofevidence, inculpating a gentleman who was walking with miss halethat night at the outwood station, as the man who struck or pushedleonards off the platform and so caused his death. but the young ladydenies that she was there at the time.\"
　　\"miss hale denies she was there!\" repeated mr. thornton, in an alteredvoice. \"tell me, what evening was it? what time?\"
　　\"about six o\"clock, on the evening of thursday, the twenty-sixth.\"
　　they walked on, side by side, in silence for a minute or two. theinspector was the first to speak.
　　\"you see, sir, there is like to be a coroner\"s inquest; and i\"ve got a youngman who is pretty positive,--at least he was at first;--since he has heardof the young lady\"s denial, he says he should not like to swear; but stillhe\"s pretty positive that he saw miss hale at the station, walking aboutwith a gentleman, not five minutes before the time, when one of theporters saw a scuffle, which he set down to some of leonards\"
　　impudence--but which led to the fall which caused his death. andseeing you come out of the very house, sir, i thought i might make boldto ask if--you see, it\"s always awkward having to do with cases ofdisputed identity, and one doesn\"t like to doubt the word of arespectable young woman unless one has strong proof to the contrary.\"
　　\"and she denied having been at the station that evening!\" repeated mr.
　　thornton, in a low, brooding tone.
　　\"yes, sir, twice over, as distinct as could be. i told her i should callagain, but seeing you just as i was on my way back from questioningthe young man who said it was her, i thought i would ask your advice,both as the magistrate who saw leonards on his death-bed, and as thegentleman who got me my berth in the force.\"
　　\"you were quite right,\" said mr. thornton. \"don\"t take any steps till youhave seen me again.\"
　　\"the young lady will expect me to call, from what i said.\"
　　\"i only want to delay you an hour. it\"s now three. come to mywarehouse at four.\"
　　\"very well, sir!\"
　　and they parted company. mr. thornton hurried to his warehouse, and,sternly forbidding his clerks to allow any one to interrupt him, he wenthis way to his own private room, and locked the door. then he indulgedhimself in the torture of thinking it all over, and realising every detail.
　　how could he have lulled himself into the unsuspicious calm in whichher tearful image had mirrored itself not two hours before, till he hadweakly pitied her and yearned towards her, and forgotten the savage,distrustful jealousy with which the sight of her--and that unknown tohim--at such an hour--in such a place--had inspired him! how couldone so pure have stooped from her decorous and noble manner ofbearing! but was it decorous--was it? he hated himself for the idea thatforced itself upon him, just for an instant--no more--and yet, while itwas present, thrilled him with its old potency of attraction towards herimage. and then this falsehood--how terrible must be some dread ofshame to be revealed--for, after all, the provocation given by such aman as leonards was, when excited by drinking, might, in allprobability, be more than enough to justify any one who came forwardto state the circumstances openly and without reserve! how creepingand deadly that fear which could bow down the truthful margaret tofalsehood! he could almost pity her. what would be the end of it? shecould not have considered all she was entering upon; if there was aninquest and the young man came forward. suddenly he started up.
　　there should be no inquest. he would save margaret. he would takethe responsibility of preventing the inquest, the issue of which, from theuncertainty of the medical testimony (which he had vaguely heard the
　　night before, from the surgeon in attendance), could be but doubtful; thedoctors had discovered an internal disease far advanced, and sure toprove fatal; they had stated that death might have been accelerated bythe fall, or by the subsequent drinking and exposure to cold. if he hadbut known how margaret would have become involved in the affair--ifhe had but foreseen that she would have stained her whiteness by afalsehood, he could have saved her by a word; for the question, ofinquest or no inquest, had hung trembling in the balance only the nightbefore. miss hale might love another--was indifferent andcontemptuous to him--but he would yet do her faithful acts of service ofwhich she should never know. he might despise her, but the womanwhom he had once loved should be kept from shame; and shame itwould be to pledge herself to a lie in a public court, or otherwise tostand and acknowledge her reason for desiring darkness rather thanlight.
　　very gray and stern did mr. thornton look, as he passed out through hiswondering clerks. he was away about half an hour; and scarcely lessstern did he look when he returned, although his errand had beensuccessful.
　　he wrote two lines on a slip of paper, put it in an envelope, and sealed itup. this he gave to one of the clerks, saying:-\"
　　i appointed watson--he who was a packer in the warehouse, and whowent into the police--to call on me at four o\"clock. i have just met with agentleman from liverpool who wishes to see me before he leaves town.
　　take care to give this note to watson he calls.\"
　　the note contained these words:
　　\"there will be no inquest. medical evidence not sufficient to justify it.
　　take no further steps. i have not seen the corner; but i will take theresponsibility.\"
　　\"well,\" thought watson, \"it relieves me from an awkward job. none ofmy witnesses seemed certain of anything except the young woman. shewas clear and distinct enough; the porter at the rail-road had seen ascuffle; or when he found it was likely to bring him in as a witness, thenit might not have been a scuffle, only a little larking, and leonardsmight have jumped off the platform himself;--he would not stick firm toanything. and jennings, the grocer\"s shopman,--well, he was not quiteso bad, but i doubt if i could have got him up to an oath after he heardthat miss hale flatly denied it. it would have been a troublesome joband no satisfaction. and now i must go and tell them they won\"t bewanted.\"
www．Ｌｚｕｏｗｅｎ．ｃｏｍ



第115章 CHAPTER X EXPIATION (3)


　　he accordingly presented himself again at mr. hale\"s that evening. herfather and dixon would fain have persuaded margaret to go to bed; butthey, neither of them, knew the reason for her low continued refusals to
　　do so. dixon had learnt part of the truth-but only part. margaret wouldnot tell any human being of what she had said, and she did not revealthe fatal termination to leonards\" fall from the platform. so dixoncuriosity combined with her allegiance to urge margaret to go to rest,which her appearance, as she lay on the sofa, showed but too clearlythat she required. she did not speak except when spoken to; she tried tosmile back in reply to her father\"s anxious looks and words of tenderenquiry; but, instead of a smile, the wan lips resolved themselves into asigh. he was so miserably uneasy that, at last, she consented to go intoher own room, and prepare for going to bed. she was indeed inclined togive up the idea that the inspector would call again that night, as it wasalready past nine o\"clock.
　　she stood by her father, holding on to the back of his chair.
　　\"you will go to bed soon, papa, won\"t you? don\"t sit up alone!\"
　　what his answer was she did not hear; the words were lost in the farsmaller point of sound that magnified itself to her fears, and filled herbrain. there was a low ring at the door-bell.
　　she kissed her father and glided down stairs, with a rapidity of motionof which no one would have thought her capable, who had seen her theminute before. she put aside dixon.
　　\"don\"t come; i will open the door. i know it is him--i can--i mustmanage it all myself.\"
　　\"as you please, miss!\" said dixon testily; but in a moment afterwards,she added, \"but you\"re not fit for it. you are more dead than alive.\"
　　\"am i?\" said margaret, turning round and showing her eyes all aglowwith strange fire, her cheeks flushed, though her lips were baked andlivid still.
　　she opened the door to the inspector, and preceded him into the study.
　　she placed the candle on the table, and snuffed it carefully, before sheturned round and faced him.
　　\"you are late!\" said she. \"well?\" she held her breath for the answer.
　　\"i\"m sorry to have given any unnecessary trouble, ma\"am; for, after all,they\"ve given up all thoughts of holding an inquest. i have had otherwork to do and other people to see, or i should have been here beforenow.\"
　　\"then it is ended,\" said margaret. \"there is to be no further enquiry.\"
　　\"i believe i\"ve got mr. thornton\"s note about me,\" said the inspector,fumbling in his pocket-book.
　　\"mr. thornton\"s!\" said margaret.
　　\"yes! he\"s a magistrate--ah! here it is.\" she could not see to read it--no,not although she was close to the candle. the words swam before her.
　　but she held it in her hand, and looked at it as if she were intentlystudying it.
　　\"i\"m sure, ma\"am, it\"s a great weight off my mind; for the evidence wasso uncertain, you see, that the man had received any blow at all,--and ifany question of identity came in, it so complicated the case, as i toldmr. thornton--\"
　　\"mr. thornton!\" said margaret, again.
　　\"i met him this morning, just as he was coming out of this house, and, ashe\"s an old friend of mine, besides being the magistrate who sawleonards last night, i made bold to tell him of my difficulty.\"
　　margaret sighed deeply. she did not want to hear any more; she wasafraid alike of what she had heard, and of what she might hear. shewished that the man would go. she forced herself to speak.
　　\"thank you for calling. it is very late. i dare say it is past ten o\"clock.
　　oh! here is the note!\" she continued, suddenly interpreting the meaningof the hand held out to receive it. he was putting it up, when she said, \"ithink it is a cramped, dazzling sort of writing. i could not read it; willyou just read it to me?\"
　　he read it aloud to her.
　　\"thank you. you told mr. thornton that i was not there?\"
　　\"oh, of course, ma\"am. i\"m sorry now that i acted upon information,which seems to have been so erroneous. at first the young man was sopositive; and now he says that he doubted all along, and hopes that hismistake won\"t have occasioned you such annoyance as to lose their shopyour custom. good night, ma\"am.\"
　　\"good night.\" she rang the bell for dixon to show him out. as dixonreturned up the passage margaret passed her swiftly.
　　\"it is all right!\" said she, without looking at dixon; and before thewoman could follow her with further questions she had sped up-stairs,and entered her bed-chamber, and bolted her door.
　　she threw herself, dressed as she was, upon her bed. she was too muchexhausted to think. half an hour or more elapsed before the crampednature of her position, and the chilliness, supervening upon greatfatigue, had the power to rouse her numbed faculties. then she began torecall, to combine, to wonder. the first idea that presented itself to herwas, that all this sickening alarm on frederick\"s behalf was over; thatthe strain was past. the next was a wish to remember every word of theinspector\"s which related to mr. thornton. when had he seen him?
　　what had he said? what had mr. thornton done? what were the exactwords of his note? and until she could recollect, even to the placing oromitting an article, the very expressions which he had used in the note,her mind refused to go on with its progress. but the next conviction shecame to was clear enough;--mr. thornton had seen her close tooutwood station on the fatal thursday night, and had been told of herdenial that she was there. she stood as a liar in his eyes. she was a liar.
　　but she had no thought of penitence before god; nothing but chaos andnight surrounded the one lurid fact that, in mr. thornton\"s eyes, she wasdegraded. she cared not to think, even to herself, of how much ofexcuse she might plead. that had nothing to do with mr. thornton; shenever dreamed that he, or any one else, could find cause for suspicion inwhat was so natural as her accompanying her brother; but what wasreally false and wrong was known to him, and he had a right to judgeher. \"oh, frederick! frederick!\" she cried, \"what have i not sacrificed foryou!\" even when she fell asleep her thoughts were compelled to travelthe same circle, only with exaggerated and monstrous circumstances ofpain.
t



第116章 CHAPTER X EXPIATION (4)


　　when she awoke a new idea flashed upon her with all the brightness ofthe morning. mr. thornton had learnt her falsehood before he went tothe coroner; that suggested the thought, that he had possibly beeninfluenced so to do with a view of sparing her the repetition of herdenial. but she pushed this notion on one side with the sick wilfulnessof a child. if it were so, she felt no gratitude to him, as it only showedher how keenly he must have seen that she was disgraced already,before he took such unwonted pains to spare her any further trial oftruthfulness, which had already failed so signally. she would have gonethrough the whole--she would have perjured herself to save frederick,rather--far rather--than mr. thornton should have had the knowledgethat prompted him to interfere to save her. what ill-fate brought him incontact with the inspector? what made him be the very magistrate sentfor to receive leonards\" deposition? what had leonards said? howmuch of it was intelligible to mr. thornton, who might already, foraught she knew, be aware of the old accusation against frederick,through their mutual friend, mr. bell? if so, he had striven to save theson, who came in defiance of the law to attend his mother\"s death-bed.
　　and under this idea she could feel grateful--not yet, if ever she should,if his interference had been prompted by contempt. oh! had any onesuch just cause to feel contempt for her? mr. thornton, above allpeople, on whom she had looked down from her imaginary heights tillnow! she suddenly found herself at his feet, and was strangelydistressed at her fall. she shrank from following out the premises totheir conclusion, and so acknowledging to herself how much she valuedhis respect and good opinion. whenever this idea presented itself to herat the end of a long avenue of thoughts, she turned away from followingthat path--she would not believe in it.
　　it was later than she fancied, for in the agitation of the previous night,she had forgotten to wind up her watch; and mr. hale had givenespecial orders that she was not to be disturbed by the usual awakening.
　　by and by the door opened cautiously, and dixon put her head in.
　　perceiving that margaret was awake, she came forwards with a letter.
　　\"here\"s something to do you good, miss. a letter from masterfrederick.\"
　　\"thank you, dixon. how late it is!\"
　　she spoke very languidly, and suffered dixon to lay it on thecounterpane before her, without putting out a hand to lake it.
　　\"you want your breakfast, i\"m sure. i will bring it you in a minute.
　　master has got the tray all ready, i know.\"
　　margaret did not reply; she let her go; she felt that she must be alonebefore she could open that letter. she opened it at last. the first thingthat caught her eye was the date two days earlier than she received it.
　　he had then written when he had promised, and their alarm might havebeen spared. but she would read the letter and see. it was hasty enough,but perfectly satisfactory. he had seen henry lennox, who knewenough of the case to shake his head over it, in the first instance, andtell him he had done a very daring thing in returning to england, withsuch an accusation, backed by such powerful influence, hanging overhim. but when they had come to talk it over, mr. lennox hadacknowledged that there might be some chance of his acquittal, if hecould but prove his statements by credible witnesses--that in such caseit might be worth while to stand his trial, otherwise it would be a greatrisk. he would examine--he would take every pains. \"it struck me\" saidfrederick, \"that your introduction, little sister of mine, went a long way.
　　is it so? he made many inquiries, i can assure you. he seemed a sharp,intelligent fellow, and in good practice too, to judge from the signs ofbusiness and the number of clerks about him. but these may be onlylawyer\"s dodges. i have just caught a packet on the point of sailing--iam off in five minutes. i may have to come back to england again onthis business, so keep my visit secret. i shall send my father some rareold sherry, such as you cannot buy in england,--(such stuff as i\"ve gotin the bottle before me)! he needs something of the kind--my dear loveto him--god bless him. i\"m sure--here\"s my cab. p.s.--what an escapethat was! take care you don\"t breathe of my having been--not even tothe shaws.\"
　　margaret turned to the envelope; it was marked \"too late.\" the letter hadprobably been trusted to some careless waiter, who had forgotten topost it. oh! what slight cobwebs of chances stand between us andtemptation! frederick had been safe, and out of england twenty, nay,thirty hours ago; and it was only about seventeen hours since she hadtold a falsehood to baffle pursuit, which even then would have beenvain. how faithless she had been! where now was her proud motto,\"fais ce que dois, advienne que pourra?\" if she had but dared to bravelytell the truth as regarded herself, defying them to find out what she
　　refused to tell concerning another, how light of heart she would nowhave felt! not humbled before god, as having failed in trust towardshim; not degraded and abased in mr. thornton\"s sight. she caughtherself up at this with a miserable tremor; here was she classing his lowopinion of her alongside with the displeasure of god. how was it thathe haunted her imagination so persistently? what could it be? why didshe care for what he thought, in spite of all her pride in spite of herself?
　　she believed that she could have borne the sense of almightydispleasure, because he knew all, and could read her penitence, andhear her. cries for help in time to come. but mr. thornton--why did shetremble, and hide her face in the pillow? what strong feeling hadovertaken her at last?
下~书~网



第117章 CHAPTER X EXPIATION (5)


　　she sprang out of bed and prayed long and earnestly. it soothed andcomforted her so to open her heart. but as soon as she reviewed herposition she found the sting was still there; that she was not goodenough, nor pure enough to be indifferent to the lowered opinion of afellow creature; that the thought of how he must be looking upon herwith contempt, stood between her and her sense of wrong-doing. shetook her letter in to her father as soon as she was drest. there was soslight an allusion to their alarm at the rail-road station, that mr. halepassed over it without paying any attention to it. indeed, beyond themere fact of frederick having sailed undiscovered and unsuspected, hedid not gather much from the letter at the time, he was so uneasy aboutmargaret\"s pallid looks. she seemed continually on the point ofweeping.
　　\"you are sadly overdone, margaret. it is no wonder. but you must letme nurse you now.\"
　　he made her lie down on the sofa, and went for a shawl to cover herwith. his tenderness released her tears; and she cried bitterly.
　　\"poor child!--poor child!\" said he, looking fondly at her, as she lay withher face to the wall, shaking with her sobs. after a while they ceased,and she began to wonder whether she durst give herself the relief oftelling her father of all her trouble. but there were more reasons againstit than for it. the only one for it was the relief to herself; and against itwas the thought that it would add materially to her father\"s nervousness,if it were indeed necessary for frederick to come to england again; thathe would dwell on the circumstance of his son\"s having caused the deathof a man, however unwittingly and unwillingly; that this knowledgewould perpetually recur to trouble him, in various shapes ofexaggeration and distortion from the simple truth. and about her owngreat fault--he would be distressed beyond measure at her want ofcourage and faith, yet perpetually troubled to make excuses for her.
　　formerly margaret would have come to him as priest as well as father,
　　to tell him of her temptation and her sin; but latterly they had notspoken much on such subjects; and she knew not how, in his change ofopinions, he would reply if the depth of her soul called unto his. no; shewould keep her secret, and bear the burden alone. alone she would gobefore god, and cry for his absolution. alone she would endure herdisgraced position in the opinion of mr. thornton. she was unspeakablytouched by the tender efforts of her father to think of cheerful subjectson which to talk, and so to take her thoughts away from dwelling on allthat had happened of late. it was some months since he had been sotalkative as he was this day. he would not let her sit up, and offendeddixon desperately by insisting on waiting upon her himself.
　　at last she smiled; a poor, weak little smile; but it gave him the truestpleasure.
　　\"it seems strange to think, that what gives us most hope for the futureshould be called dolores,\" said margaret. the remark was more incharacter with her father than with her usual self; but to-day theyseemed to have changed natures.
　　\"her mother was a spaniard, i believe: that accounts for her religion.
　　her father was a stiff presbyterian when i knew him. but it is a verysoft and pretty name.\"
　　\"how young she is!--younger by fourteen months than i am. just, theage that edith was when she was engaged to captain lennox. papa, wewill go and see them in spain.\"
　　he shook his head. but he said, \"if you wish it, margaret. only let uscome back here. it would seem unfair--unkind to your mother, whoalways, i\"m afraid, disliked milton so much, if we left it now she islying here, and cannot go with us. no, dear; you shall go and see them,and bring me back a report of my spanish daughter.\"
　　\"no, papa, i won\"t go without you. who is to take care of you when i amgone?\"
www.xiabook.com



第118章 CHAPTER X EXPIATION (6)


　　\"i should like to know which of us is taking care of the other. but if youwent, i should persuade mr. thornton to let me give him doublelessons. we would work up the classics famously. that would be aperpetual interest. you might go on, and see edith at corfu, if youliked.\"
　　margaret did not speak all at once. then she said rather gravely: \"thankyou, papa. but i don\"t want to go. we will hope that mr. lennox willmanage so well, that frederick may bring dolores to see us when theyare married. and as for edith, the regiment won\"t remain much longerin corfu. perhaps we shall see both of them here before another year isout.\"
　　mr. hale\"s cheerful subjects had come to an end. some painfulrecollection had stolen across his mind, and driven him into silence. by
　　and-by margaret said:
　　\"papa--did you see nicholas higgins at the funeral? he was there, andmary too. poor fellow! it was his way of showing sympathy. he has agood warm heart under his bluff abrupt ways.\"
　　\"i am sure of it,\" replied mr. hale. \"i saw it all along, even while youtried to persuade me that he was all sorts of bad things. we will go andsee them to-morrow, if you are strong enough to walk so far.\"
　　\"oh yes. i want to see them. we did not pay mary--or rather she refusedto take it, dixon says. we will go so as to catch him just after hisdinner, and before he goes to his work.\"
　　towards evening mr. hale said:
　　\"i half expected mr. thornton would have called. he spoke of a bookyesterday which he had, and which i wanted to see. he said he wouldtry and bring it to-day.\"
　　margaret sighed. she knew he would not come. he would be toodelicate to run the chance of meeting her, while her shame must be sofresh in his memory. the very mention of his name renewed hertrouble, and produced a relapse into the feeling of depressed, preoccupiedexhaustion. she gave way to listless languor. suddenly itstruck her that this was a strange manner to show her patience, or toreward her father for his watchful care of her all through the day. shesate up and offered to read aloud. his eyes were failing, and he gladlyaccepted her proposal. she read well: she gave the due emphasis; buthad any one asked her, when she had ended, the meaning of what shehad been reading, she could not have told. she was smitten with afeeling of ingratitude to mr. thornton, inasmuch as, in the morning, shehad refused to accept the kindness he had shown her in making furtherinquiry from the medical men, so as to obviate any inquest being held.
　　oh! she was grateful! she had been cowardly and false, and had shownher cowardliness and falsehood in action that could not be recalled; butshe was not ungrateful. it sent a glow to her heart, to know how shecould feel towards one who had reason to despise her. his cause forcontempt was so just, that she should have respected him less if she hadthought he did not feel contempt. it was a pleasure to feel howthoroughly she respected him. he could not prevent her doing that; itwas the one comfort in all this misery.
　　late in the evening, the expected book arrived, \"with mr. thornton\"skind regards, and wishes to know how mr. hale is.\"
　　\"say that i am much better, dixon, but that miss hale--\"
　　\"no, papa,\" said margaret, eagerly--\"don\"t say anything about me. hedoes not ask.\"
　　\"my dear child, how you are shivering!\" said her father, a few minutesafterwards. \"you must go to bed directly. you have turned quite pale!\"
　　margaret did not refuse to go, though she was loth to leave her fatheralone. she needed the relief of solitude after a day of busy thinking, andbusier repenting.
　　but she seemed much as usual the next day; the lingering gravity andsadness, and the occasional absence of mind, were not unnaturalsymptoms in the early days of grief and almost in proportion to her reestablishmentin health, was her father\"s relapse into his abstractedmusing upon the wife he had lost, and the past era in his life that wasclosed to him for ever.
下 /书 网



第119章 CHAPTER XI UNION NOT ALWAYS STRENGTH (1)


　　\"the steps of the bearers, heavy and slow,the sobs of the mourners, deep and low.\"
　　shelley.
　　at the time arranged the previous day, they set out on their walk to seenicholas higgins and his daughter. they both were reminded of theirrecent loss, by a strange kind of shyness in their new habiliments, andin the fact that it was the first time, for many weeks, that they haddeliberately gone out together. they drew very close to each other inunspoken sympathy.
　　nicholas was sitting by the fire-side in his accustomed corner: but hehad not his accustomed pipe. he was leaning his head upon his hand,his arm resting on his knee. he did not get up when he saw them,though margaret could read the welcome in his eye.
　　\"sit ye down, sit ye down. fire\"s welly out,\" said he, giving it a vigorouspoke, as if to turn attention away from himself. he was ratherdisorderly, to be sure, with a black unshaven beard of several days\"
　　growth, making his pale face look yet paler, and a jacket which wouldhave been all the better for patching.
　　\"we thought we should have a good chance of finding you, just afterdinner-time,\" said margaret.
　　\"we have had our sorrow too, since we saw you,\" said mr. hale.
　　\"ay, ay. sorrows is more plentiful than dinners just now; i reckon, my
　　dinner hour stretches all o\"er the day; yo\"re pretty sure of finding me.\"
　　\"are you out of work?\" asked margaret.
　　\"ay,\" he replied shortly. then, after a moment\"s silence, he added,looking up for the first time: \"i\"m not wanting brass. dunno yo\" think it.
　　bess, poor lass, had a little stock under her pillow, ready to slip into myhand, last moment, and mary is fustian-cutting. but i\"m out o\" work a\"
　　the same.\"
　　\"we owe mary some money,\" said mr. hale, before margaret\"s sharppressure on his arm could arrest the words.
　　\"if hoo takes it, i\"ll turn her out o\" doors. i\"ll bide inside these four walls,and she\"ll bide out. that\"s a\".\"
　　\"but we owe her many thanks for her kind service,\" began mr. haleagain.
　　\"i ne\"er thanked yo\"r daughter theer for her deeds o\" love to my poorwench. i ne\"er could find th\" words. i\"se have to begin and try now, if yo\"
　　start making an ado about what little mary could sarve yo\".\"
　　\"is it because of the strike you\"re out of work?\" asked margaret gently.
　　\"strike\"s ended. it\"s o\"er for this time. i\"m out o\" work because i ne\"erasked for it. and i ne\"er asked for it, because good words is scarce, andbad words is plentiful.\"
　　he was in a mood to take a surly pleasure in giving answers that werelike riddles. but margaret saw that he would like to be asked for theexplanation.
　　\"and good words are--?\"
　　\"asking for work. i reckon them\"s almost the best words that men cansay. \"gi\" me work\" means \"and i\"ll do it like a man. them\"s goodwords.\"
　　\"and bad words are refusing you work when you ask for it.\"
　　\"ay. bad words is saying \"aha, my fine chap! yo\"ve been true to yo\"rorder, and i\"ll be true to mine. yo\" did the best yo\" could for them aswanted help; that\"s yo\"r way of being true to yo\"r kind; and i\"ll be true tomine. yo\"ve been a poor fool, as knowed no better nor be a true faithfulfool. so go and be d--d to yo\". there\"s no work for yo\" here.\" them\"s badwords. i\"m not a fool; and if i was, folk ought to ha\" taught me how tobe wise after their fashion. i could mappen ha\" learnt, if any one hadtried to teach me.\"
　　\"would it not be worth while,\" said mr. hale, \"to ask your old master ifhe would take you back again? it might be a poor chance, but it wouldbe a chance.\"
　　he looked up again, with a sharp glance at the questioner; and thentittered a low and bitter laugh.
　　\"measter! if it\"s no offence, i\"ll ask yo\" a question or two in my turn.\"
　　\"you\"re quite welcome,\" said mr. hale.
　　\"i reckon yo\"n some way of earning your bread. folk seldom lives i\"
　　milton lust for pleasure, if they can live anywhere else.\"
　　\"you are quite right. i have some independent property, but myintention in settling in milton was to become a private tutor.\"
　　\"to teach folk. well! i reckon they pay yo\" for teaching them, dunnotthey?\"
　　\"yes,\" replied mr. hale, smiling. \"i teach in order to get paid.\"
　　\"and them that pays yo\", dun they tell yo\" whatten to do, or whatten notto do wi\" the money they gives you in just payment for your pains--infair exchange like?\"
　　\"no; to be sure not!\"
　　\"they dunnot say, \"yo\" may have a brother, or a friend as dear as abrother, who wants this here brass for a purpose both yo\" and he thinkright; but yo\" mun promise not give it to him. yo\" may see a good use,as yo\" think, to put yo\"r money to; but we don\"t think it good, and so ifyo\" spend it a-thatens we\"ll just leave off dealing with yo\".\" they dunnotsay that, dun they?\"
　　\"no: to be sure not!\"
　　\"would yo\" stand it if they did?\"
　　\"it would be some very hard pressure that would make me even think ofsubmitting to such dictation.\"
　　\"there\"s not the pressure on all the broad earth that would make me, saidnicholas higgins. \"now yo\"ve got it. yo\"ve hit the bull\"s eye. hamper\"s-that\"swhere i worked--makes their men pledge \"emselves they\"ll notgive a penny to help th\" union or keep turnouts fro\" clemming. theymay pledge and make pledge,\" continued he, scornfully; \"they nobbutmake liars and hypocrites. and that\"s a less sin, to my mind, to makingmen\"s hearts so hard that they\"ll not do a kindness to them as needs it, orhelp on the right and just cause, though it goes again the strong hand.
　　but i\"ll ne\"er forswear mysel\" for a\" the work the king could gi\"e me. i\"ma member o\" the union; and i think it\"s the only thing to do the workmanany good. and i\"ve been a turn-out, and known what it were to clem; soif i get a shilling, sixpence shall go to them if they axe it from me.
　　consequence is, i dunnot see where i\"m to get a shilling.\"
　　\"is that rule about not contributing to the union in force at all the mills?\"
　　asked margaret.
　　\"i cannot say. it\"s a new regulation at ourn; and i reckon they\"ll find thatthey cannot stick to it. but it\"s in force now. by-and-by they\"ll find out,tyrants makes liars.\"
　　there was a little pause. margaret was hesitating whether she shouldsay what was in her mind; she was unwilling to irritate one who wasalready gloomy and despondent enough. at last out it came. but in hersoft tones, and with her reluctant manner, showing that she was
　　unwilling to say anything unpleasant, it did not seem to annoy higgins,only to perplex him.
　　\"do you remember poor boucher saying that the union was a tyrant? ithink he said it was the worst tyrant of all. and i remember at the time iagreed with him.\"
   www.ｌzuoＷen．Ｃom



第120章 CHAPTER XI UNION NOT ALWAYS STRENGTH (2)


　　it was a long while before he spoke. he was resting his head on his twohands, and looking down into the fire, so she could not read theexpression on his face.
　　\"i\"ll not deny but what th\" union finds it necessary to force a man intohis own good. i\"ll speak truth. a man leads a dree life who\"s not i\" th\"
　　union. but once i\" the\" union, his interests are taken care on better norhe could do it for himsel\", or by himsel\", for that matter. it\"s the onlyway working men can get their rights, by all joining together. more themembers, more chance for each one separate man having justice donehim. government takes care o\" fools and madmen; and if any man isinclined to do himsel\" or his neighbour a hurt, it puts a bit of a check onhim, whether he likes it or no. that\"s all we do i\" th\" union. we can\"tclap folk into prison; but we can make a man\"s life so heavy to be borne,that he\"s obliged to come in, and be wise and helpful in spite of himself.
　　boucher were a fool all along, and ne\"er a worse fool than at th\" last.\"
　　\"he did you harm?\" asked margaret.
　　\"ay, that did he. we had public opinion on our side, till he and his sortbegan rioting and breaking laws. it were all o\"er wi\" the strike then.\"
　　\"then would it not have been far better to have left him alone, and notforced him to join the union? he did you no good; and you drove himmad.\"
　　\"margaret,\" said her father, in a low and warning tone, for he saw thecloud gathering on higgins\"s face.
　　\"i like her,\" said higgins, suddenly. \"hoo speaks plain out what\"s in hermind. hoo doesn\"t comprehend th\" union for all that. it\"s a great power:
　　it\"s our only power. i ha\" read a bit o\" poetry about a plough going o\"er adaisy, as made tears come into my eyes, afore i\"d other cause for crying.
　　but the chap ne\"er stopped driving the plough, i\"se warrant, for all hewere pitiful about the daisy. he\"d too much mother-wit for that. th\"
　　union\"s the plough, making ready the land for harvest-time. such asboucher--\"twould be settin\" him up too much to liken him to a daisy;he\"s liker a weed lounging over the ground--mun just make up theirmind to be put out o\" the way. i\"m sore vexed wi\" him just now. so,mappen, i dunnot speak him fair. i could go o\"er him wi\" a ploughmysel\", wi\" a\" the pleasure in life.\"
　　\"why? what has he been doing? anything fresh?\"
　　\"ay, to be sure. he\"s ne\"er out o\" mischief, that man. first of a\" he mustgo raging like a mad fool, and kick up yon riot. then he\"d to go into
　　hiding, where he\"d a been yet, if thornton had followed him out as i\"dhoped he would ha\" done. but thornton, having got his own purpose,didn\"t care to go on wi\" the prosecution for the riot. so boucher slunkback again to his house. he ne\"er showed himsel\" abroad for a day ortwo. he had that grace. and then, where think ye that he went? why, tohamper\"s. damn him! he went wi\" his mealy-mouthed face, that turnsme sick to look at, a-asking for work, though he knowed well enoughthe new rule, o\" pledging themselves to give nought to th\" unions;nought to help the starving turn-out! why he\"d a clemmed to death, ifth\" union had na helped him in his pinch. there he went, ossing topromise aught, and pledge himsel\" to aught--to tell a\" he know\"d on ourproceedings, the good-for-nothing judas! but i\"ll say this for hamper,and thank him for it at my dying day, he drove boucher away, andwould na listen to him--ne\"er a word--though folk standing by, says thetraitor cried like a babby!\"
　　\"oh! how shocking! how pitiful!\" exclaimed margaret. \"higgins, i don\"tknow you to-day. don\"t you see how you\"ve made boucher what he is,by driving him into the union against his will--without his heart goingwith it. you have made him what he is!\"
　　made him what he is! what was he?
　　gathering, gathering along the narrow street, came a hollow, measuredsound; now forcing itself on their attention. many voices were hushedand low: many steps were heard not moving onwards, at least not withany rapidity or steadiness of motion, but as if circling round one spot.
　　yes, there was one distinct, slow tramp of feet, which made itself aclear path through the air, and reached their ears; the measured labouredwalk of men carrying a heavy burden. they were all drawn towards thehouse-door by some irresistible impulse; impelled thither--not by a poorcuriosity, but as if by some solemn blast.
　　six men walked in the middle of the road, three of them beingpolicemen. they carried a door, taken off its hinges, upon theirshoulders, on which lay some dead human creature; and from each sideof the door there were constant droppings. all the street turned out tosee, and, seeing, to accompany the procession, each one questioning thebearers, who answered almost reluctantly at last, so often had they toldthe tale.
　　\"we found him i\" th\" brook in the field beyond there.\"
　　\"th\" brook!--why there\"s not water enough to drown him!\"
　　\"he was a determined chap. he lay with his face downwards. he wassick enough o\" living, choose what cause he had for it.\"
　　higgins crept up to margaret\"s side, and said in a weak piping kind ofvoice: \"it\"s not john boucher? he had na spunk enough. sure! it\"s notjohn boucher! why, they are a\" looking this way! listen! i\"ve a singing
　　in my head, and i cannot hear.\"
　　they put the door down carefully upon the stones, and all might see thepoor drowned wretch--his glassy eyes, one half-open, staring rightupwards to the sky. owing to the position in which he had been foundlying, his face was swollen and discoloured besides, his skin wasstained by the water in the brook, which had been used for dyeingpurposes. the fore part of his head was bald; but the hair grew thin andlong behind, and every separate lock was a conduit for water. throughall these disfigurements, margaret recognised john boucher. it seemedto her so sacrilegious to be peering into that poor distorted, agonisedface, that, by a flash of instinct, she went forwards and softly coveredthe dead man\"s countenance with her handkerchief. the eyes that sawher do this followed her, as she turned away from her pious office, andwere thus led to the place where nicholas higgins stood, like onerooted to the spot. the men spoke together, and then one of them cameup to higgins, who would have fain shrunk back into his house.
　　\"higgins, thou knowed him! thou mun go tell the wife. do it gently,man, but do it quick, for we canna leave him here long.\"
　　\"i canna go,\" said higgins. \"dunnot ask me. i canna face her.\"
　　\"thou knows her best,\" said the man. \"we\"n done a deal in bringing himhere--thou take thy share.\"




第121章 CHAPTER XI UNION NOT ALWAYS STRENGTH (3)


　　\"i canna do it,\" said higgins. \"i\"m welly felled wi\" seeing him. we wasn\"tfriends; and now he\"s dead.\"
　　\"well, if thou wunnot thou wunnot. some one mun, though. it\"s a dreetask; but it\"s a chance, every minute, as she doesn\"t hear on it in somerougher way nor a person going to make her let on by degrees, as itwere.\"
　　\"papa, do you go,\" said margaret, in a low voice.
　　\"if i could--if i had time to think of what i had better say; but all at once---\"
　　margaret saw that her father was indeed unable. he was tremblingfrom head to foot.
　　\"i will go,\" said she.
　　\"bless yo\", miss, it will be a kind act; for she\"s been but a sickly sort ofbody, i hear, and few hereabouts know much on her.\"
　　margaret knocked at the closed door; but there was such a noise, as ofmany little ill-ordered children, that she could hear no reply; indeed, shedoubted if she was heard, and as every moment of delay made her recoilfrom her task more and more, she opened the door and went in, shuttingit after her, and even, unseen to the woman, fastening the bolt.
　　mrs. boucher was sitting in a rocking-chair, on the other side of the ill-redd-up fireplace; it looked as if the house had been untouched for daysby any effort at cleanliness.
　　margaret said something, she hardly knew what, her throat and mouth
　　were so dry, and the children\"s noise completely prevented her frombeing heard. she tried again.
　　\"how are you, mrs. boucher? but very poorly, i\"m afraid.\"
　　\"i\"ve no chance o\" being well,\" said she querulously. \"i\"m left alone tomanage these childer, and nought for to give \"em for to keep \"em quiet.
　　john should na ha\" left me, and me so poorly.\"
　　\"how long is it since he went away?\"
　　\"four days sin\". no one would give him work here, and he\"d to go ontramp toward greenfield. but he might ha\" been back afore this, or sentme some word if he\"d getten work. he might----\"
　　\"oh, don\"t blame him,\" said margaret. \"he felt it deeply, i\"m sure----\"
　　\"willto\" hold thy din, and let me hear the lady speak!\" addressing herself,in no very gentle voice, to a little urchin of about a year old. sheapologetically continued to margaret, \"he\"s always mithering me for\"daddy\" and \"butty;\" and i ha\" no butties to give him, and daddy\"s away,and forgotten us a\", i think. he\"s his father\"s darling, he is,\" said she, witha sudden turn of mood, and, dragging the child up to her knee, shebegan kissing it fondly.
　　margaret laid her hand on the woman\"s arm to arrest her attention. theireyes met.
　　\"poor little fellow!\" said margaret, slowly; \"he was his father\"s darling.\"
　　\"he is his father\"s darling,\" said the woman, rising hastily, and standingface to face with margaret. neither of them spoke for a moment or two.
　　then mrs. boucher began in a low, growling tone, gathering inwildness as she went on: he is his father\"s darling, i say. poor folk canlove their childer as well as rich. why dunno yo\" speak? why dun yo\"
　　stare at me wi\" your great pitiful eyes? where\"s john?\" weak as she was,she shook margaret to force out an answer. \"oh, my god!\" said she,understanding the meaning of that tearful look. she sank hack into thechair. margaret took up the child and put him into her arms.
　　\"he loved him,\" said she.
　　\"ay,\" said the woman, shaking her head, \"he loved us a\". we had someone to love us once. it\"s a long time ago; but when he were in life andwith us, he did love us, he did. he loved this babby mappen the best onus; but he loved me and i loved him, though i was calling him fiveminutes agone. are yo\" sure he\"s dead?\" said she, trying to get up. \"if it\"sonly that he\"s ill and like to die, they may bring him round yet. i\"m butan ailing creature mysel\"--i\"ve been ailing this long time.\"
　　\"but he is dead--he is drowned!\"
　　\"folk are brought round after they\"re dead-drowned. whatten was ithinking of, to sit still when i should be stirring mysel\"? here, whisththee, child--whisth thee! tak\" this, tak\" aught to play wi\", but dunnot crywhile my heart\"s breaking! oh, where is my strength gone to? oh, john-
　　husband!\"
　　margaret saved her from falling by catching her in her arms. she satedown in the rocking chair, and held the woman upon her knees, herhead lying on margaret\"s shoulder. the other children, clusteredtogether in affright, began to understand the mystery of the scene; butthe ideas came slowly, for their brains were dull and languid ofperception. they set up such a cry of despair as they guessed the truth,that margaret knew not how to bear it. johnny\"s cry was loudest of themall, though he knew not why he cried, poor little fellow.
　　the mother quivered as she lay in margaret\"s arms. margaret heard anoise at the door.
wwＷ．7wenxue.com



第122章 CHAPTER XI UNION NOT ALWAYS STRENGTH (4)


　　\"open it. open it quick,\" said she to the eldest child. \"it\"s bolted; make nonoise--be very still. oh, papa, let them go upstairs very softly andcarefully, and perhaps she will not hear them. she has fainted--that\"sall.\"
　　\"it\"s as well for her, poor creature,\" said a woman following in the wakeof the bearers of the dead. \"but yo\"re not fit to hold her. stay, i\"ll runfetch a pillow and we\"ll let her down easy on the floor.\"
　　this helpful neighbour was a great relief to margaret; she was evidentlya stranger to the house, a new-comer in the district, indeed; but she wasso kind and thoughtful that margaret felt she was no longer needed; andthat it would be better, perhaps, to set an example of clearing the house,which was filled with idle, if sympathising gazers.
　　she looked round for nicholas higgins. he was not there. so she spoketo the woman who had taken the lead in placing mrs. boucher on thefloor.
　　\"can you give all these people a hint that they had better leave inquietness? so that when she comes round, she should only find one ortwo that she knows about her. papa, will you speak to the men, and getthem to go away? she cannot breathe, poor thing, with this crowd abouther.\"
　　margaret was kneeling down by mrs. boucher and bathing he face withvinegar; but in a few minutes she was surprised at the gush of fresh air.
　　she looked round, and saw a smile pass between her father and thewoman.
　　\"what is it?\" asked she.
　　\"only our good friend here,\" replied her father, \"hit on a capital expedientfor clearing the place.\"
　　\"i bid \"em begone, and each take a child with \"em, and to mind that theywere orphans, and their mother a widow. it was who could do most, andthe childer are sure of a bellyful to-day, and of kindness too. does hooknow how he died?\"
　　\"no,\" said margaret; \"i could not tell her all at once.\"
　　\"hoo mun be told because of th\" inquest. see! hoo\"s coming round; shallyou or i do it? or mappen your father would be best?\"
　　\"no; you, you,\" said margaret.
　　they awaited her perfect recovery in silence. then the neighbourwoman sat down on the floor, and took mrs. boucher\"s head andshoulders on her lap.
　　\"neighbour,\" said she, \"your man is dead. guess yo\" how he died?\"
　　\"he were drowned,\" said mrs. boucher, feebly, beginning to cry for thefirst time, at this rough probing of her sorrows.
　　\"he were found drowned. he were coming home very hopeless o\" aughton earth. he thought god could na be harder than men; mappen not sohard; mappen as tender as a mother; mappen tenderer. i\"m not saying hedid right, and i\"m not saying he did wrong. all i say is, may neither menor mine ever have his sore heart, or we may do like things.\"
　　\"he has left me alone wi\" a\" these children!\" moaned the widow, lessdistressed at the manner of the death than margaret expected; but it wasof a piece with her helpless character to feel his loss as principallyaffecting herself and her children.
　　\"not alone,\" said mr. hale, solemnly. \"who is with you? who will takeup your cause?\" the widow opened her eyes wide, and looked at thenew speaker, of whose presence she had not been aware till then.
　　\"who has promised to be a father to the fatherless?\" continued he.
　　\"but i\"ve getten six children, sir, and the eldest not eight years of age.
　　i\"m not meaning for to doubt his power, sir,--only it needs a deal o\"
　　trust;\" and she began to cry afresh.
　　\"hoo\"ll be better able to talk to-morrow, sir,\" said the neighbour. \"bestcomfort now would be the feel of a child at her heart. i\"m sorry theytook the babby.\"
　　\"i\"ll go for it,\" said margaret. and in a few minutes she returned,carrying johnnie, his face all smeared with eating, and his hands loadedwith treasures in the shape of shells, and bits of crystal, and the head ofa plaster figure. she placed him in his mother\"s arms.
　　\"there!\" said the woman, \"now you go. they\"ll cry together, and comforttogether, better nor any one but a child can do. i\"ll stop with her as longas i\"m needed, and if yo\" come to-morrow, yo\" can have a deal o\" wisetalk with her, that she\"s not up to to-day.\"
　　as margaret and her father went slowly up the street, she paused athiggins\"s closed door.
　　\"shall we go in?\" asked her father. \"i was thinking of him too.\"
　　they knocked. there was no answer, so they tried the door. it wasbolted, but they thought they heard him moving within.
　　\"nicholas!\" said margaret. there was no answer, and they might havegone away, believing the house to be empty, if there had not been some
　　accidental fall, as of a book, within.
　　\"nicholas!\" said margaret again. \"it is only us. won\"t you let us come in?\"
　　\"no,\" said he. \"i spoke as plain as i could, \"bout using words, when ibolted th\" door. let me be, this day.\"
　　mr. hale would have urged their desire, but margaret placed her fingeron his lips.
　　\"i don\"t wonder at it,\" said she. \"i myself long to be alone. it seems theonly thing to do one good after a day like this.\"




第123章 CHAPTER XII LOOKING SOUTH (1)


　　\"a spade! a rake! a hoe!
　　a pickaxe or a bill!
　　a hook to reap, or a scythe to mow,a flail, or what ye will-and here\"s a ready handto ply the needful tool,and skill\"d enough, by lessons rough,in labour\"s rugged school.\"
　　hood.
　　higgins\"s door was locked the next day, when they went to pay theircall on the widow boucher: but they learnt this time from an officiousneighbour, that he was really from home. he had, however, been in tosee mrs. boucher, before starting on his day\"s business, whatever thatwas. it was but an unsatisfactory visit to mrs. boucher; she consideredherself as an ill-used woman by her poor husband\"s suicide; and therewas quite germ of truth enough in this idea to make it a very difficultone to refute. still, it was unsatisfactory to see how completely her
　　thoughts were turned upon herself and her own position, and thisselfishness extended even to her relations with her children, whom sheconsidered as incumbrances, even in the very midst of her somewhatanimal affection for them. margaret tried to make acquaintances withone or two of them, while her father strove to raise the widow\"sthoughts into some higher channel than that of mere helplessquerulousness. she found that the children were truer and simplermourners than the widow. daddy had been a kind daddy to them; eachcould tell, in their eager stammering way, of some tenderness shownsome indulgence granted by the lost father.
　　\"is yon thing upstairs really him? it doesna look like him. i\"m feared onit, and i never was feared o\" daddy.\"
　　margaret\"s heart bled to hear that the mother, in her selfish requirementof sympathy, had taken her children upstairs to see their disfiguredfather. it was intermingling the coarseness of horror with theprofoundness of natural grief she tried to turn their thoughts in someother direction; on what they could do for mother; on what--for this wasa more efficacious way of putting it--what father would have wishedthem to do. margaret was more successful than mr. hale in her efforts.
　　the children seeing their little duties lie in action close around them,began to try each one to do something that she suggested towardsredding up the slatternly room. but her father set too high a standard,and too abstract a view, before the indolent invalid. she could not rouseher torpid mind into any vivid imagination of what her husband\"smisery might have been before he had resorted to the last terrible step;she could only look upon it as it affected herself; she could not enterinto the enduring mercy of the god who had not specially interposed toprevent the water from drowning her prostrate husband; and althoughshe was secretly blaming her husband for having fallen into such dreardespair, and denying that he had any excuse for his last rash act, shewas inveterate in her abuse of all who could by any possibility besupposed to have driven him to such desperation. the masters--mr.
　　thornton in particular, whose mill had been attacked by boucher, andwho, after the warrant had been issued for his apprehension on thecharge of rioting, had caused it to be withdrawn,--the union, of whichhiggins was the representative to the poor woman,--the children sonumerous, so hungry, and so noisy--all made up one great army ofpersonal enemies, whose fault it was that she was now a helplesswidow.
　　margaret heard enough of this unreasonableness to dishearten her; andwhen they came away she found it impossible to cheer her father.
　　\"it is the town life,\" said she. \"their nerves are quickened by the hasteand bustle and speed of everything around them, to say nothing of the
　　confinement in these pent-up houses, which of itself is enough to inducedepression and worry of spirits. now in the country, people live somuch more out of doors, even children, and even in the winter.\"
　　\"but people must live in towns. and in the country some get suchstagnant habits of mind that they are almost fatalists.\"
　　\"yes; i acknowledge that. i suppose each mode of life produces its owntrials and its own temptations. the dweller in towns must find it asdifficult to be patient and calm, as the country-bred man must find it tobe active, and equal to unwonted emergencies. both must find it hard torealise a future of any kind; the one because the present is so living andhurrying and close around him; the other because his life tempts him torevel in the mere sense of animal existence, not knowing of, andconsequently not caring for any pungency of pleasure for the attainmentof which he can plan, and deny himself and look forward.\"
　　\"and thus both the necessity for engrossment, and the stupid content inthe present, produce the same effects. but this poor mrs. boucher! howlittle we can do for her.\"
　　\"and yet we dare not leave her without our efforts, although they mayseem so useless. oh papa! it\"s a hard world to live in!\"
　　\"so it is, my child. we feel it so just now, at any rate; but we have beenvery happy, even in the midst of our sorrow. what a pleasurefrederick\"s visit was!\"
　　\"yes, that it was,\" said margaret; brightly. \"it was such a charming,snatched, forbidden thing.\" but she suddenly stopped speaking. she hadspoiled the remembrance of frederick\"s visit to herself by her owncowardice. of all faults the one she most despised in others was thewant of bravery; the meanness of heart which leads to untruth. and herehad she been guilty of it! then came the thought of mr. thornton\"scognisance of her falsehood. she wondered if she should have mindeddetection half so much from any one else. she tried herself inimagination with her aunt shaw and edith; with her father; withcaptain and mr. lennox; with frederick. the thought of the lastknowing what she had done, even in his own behalf, was the mostpainful, for the brother and sister were in the first flush of their mutualregard and love; but even any fall in frederick\"s opinion was as nothingto the shame, the shrinking shame she felt at the thought of meeting mr.
下 ^书^ 网



第124章 CHAPTER XII LOOKING SOUTH (2)


　　thornton again. and yet she longed to see him, to get it over; tounderstand where she stood in his opinion. her cheeks burnt as sherecollected how proudly she had implied an objection to trade (in theearly days of their acquaintance), because it too often led to the deceitof passing off inferior for superior goods, in the one branch; ofassuming credit for wealth and resources not possessed, in the other.
　　she remembered mr. thornton\"s look of calm disdain, as in few words
　　he gave her to understand that, in the great scheme of commerce, alldishonourable ways of acting were sure to prove injurious in the longrun, and that, testing such actions simply according to the poor standardof success, there was folly and not wisdom in all such, and every kindof deceit in trade, as well as in other things. she remembered--she, thenstrong in her own untempted truth--asking him, if he did not think thatbuying in the cheapest and selling in the dearest market proved somewant of the transparent justice which is so intimately connected with theidea of truth: and she had used the word chivalric--and her father hadcorrected her with the higher word, christian; and so drawn theargument upon himself, while she sate silent by with a slight feeling ofcontempt.
　　no more contempt for her!--no more talk about the chivalric!
　　henceforward she must feel humiliated and disgraced in his sight. butwhen should she see him? her heart leaped up in apprehension at everyring of the door-bell; and yet when it fell down to calmness, she feltstrangely saddened and sick at heart at each disappointment. it was veryevident that her father expected to see him, and was surprised that hedid not come. the truth was, that there were points in their conversationthe other night on which they had no time then to enlarge; but it hadbeen understood that if possible on the succeeding evening--if not then,at least the very first evening that mr. thornton could command,--theyshould meet for further discussion. mr. hale had looked forward to thismeeting ever since they had parted. he had not yet resumed theinstruction to his pupils, which he had relinquished at thecommencement of his wife\"s more serious illness, so he had feweroccupations than usual; and the great interest of the last day or so(boucher\"s suicide) had driven him back with more eagerness than everupon his speculations. he was restless all evening. he kept saying, \"iquite expected to have seen mr. thornton. i think the messenger whobrought the book last night must have had some note, and forgot todeliver it. do you think there has been any message left to-day?\"
　　\"i will go and inquire, papa,\" said margaret, after the changes on thesesentences had been rung once or twice. \"stay, there\"s a ring!\" she satedown instantly, and bent her head attentively over her work. she hearda step on the stairs, but it was only one, and she knew it was dixon\"s.
　　she lifted up her head and sighed, and believed she felt glad.
　　\"it\"s that higgins, sir. he wants to see you, or else miss hale. or itmight be miss hale first, and then you, sir; for he\"s in a strange kind ofway.
　　\"he had better come up here, dixon; and then he can see us both, andchoose which he likes for his listener.\"
　　\"oh! very well, sir. i\"ve no wish to hear what he\"s got to say, i\"m sure;
　　only, if you could see his shoes, i\"m sure you\"d say the kitchen was thefitter place.
　　\"he can wipe them, i suppose, said mr. hale. so dixon flung off, to bidhim walk up-stairs. she was a little mollified, however, when he lookedat his feet with a hesitating air; and then, sitting down on the;bottomstair, he took off the offending shoes, and without a word walked upstairs.
　　\"sarvant, sir!\" said he, slicking his hair down when he came into theroom. \"if hoo\"l excuse me (looking at margaret) for being i\" mystockings; i\"se been tramping a\" day, and streets is none o\" th\" cleanest.\"
　　margaret thought that fatigue might account for the change in hismanner, for he was unusually quiet and subdued; and he had evidentlysome difficulty in saying what he came to say.
　　mr. hale\"s ever-ready sympathy with anything of shyness or hesitation,or want of self-possession, made him come to his aid.
　　\"we shall have tea up directly, and then you\"ll take a cup with us, mr.
　　higgins. i am sure you are tired, if you\"ve been out much this wetrelaxing day. margaret, my dear, can\"t you hasten tea?\"
　　margaret could only hasten tea by taking the preparation of it into herown hands, and so offending dixon, who was emerging out of hersorrow for her late mistress into a very touchy, irritable state. butmartha, like all who came in contact with margaret--even dixonherself, in the long run--felt it a pleasure and an honour to forward anyof her wishes; and her readiness, and margaret\"s sweet forbearance,soon made dixon ashamed of herself.
　　\"why master and you must always be asking the lower classes up-stairs,since we came to milton, i cannot understand. folk at helstone werenever brought higher than the kitchen; and i\"ve let one or two of themknow before now that they might think it an honour to be even there.\"
　　higgins found it easier to unburden himself to one than to two. aftermargaret left the room, he went to the door and assured himself that itwas shut. then he came and stood close to mr. hale.
　　\"master,\" said he, \"yo\"d not guess easy what i\"ve been tramping after today.
　　special if yo\" remember my manner o\" talk yesterday. i\"ve been aseeking work. i have\" said he. \"i said to mysel\", i\"d keep a civil tongue inmy head, let who would say what \"em would. i\"d set my teeth into mytongue sooner nor speak i\" haste. for that man\"s sake--yo\" understand,\"
　　jerking his thumb back in some unknown direction.
　　\"no, i don\"t,\" said mr. hale, seeing he waited for some kind of assent,and completely bewildered as to who \"that man\" could be.
　　\"that chap as lies theer,\" said he, with another jerk. \"him as went anddrownded himself, poor chap! i did na\" think he\"d got it in him to lie stilland let th\" water creep o\"er him till he died. boucher, yo\" know.\"
　　\"yes, i know now,\" said mr. hale. \"go back to what you were saying:
　　you\"d not speak in haste----\"
　　\"for his sake. yet not for his sake; for where\"er he is, and whate\"er, he\"llne\"er know other clemming or cold again; but for the wife\"s sake, andthe bits o\" childer.\"
　　\"god bless you!\" said mr. hale, starting up; then, calming down, he saidbreathlessly, \"what do you mean? tell me out.\"
www.xiabook.com  #下!书! 网



第125章 CHAPTER XII LOOKING SOUTH (3)


　　\"i have telled yo\",\" said higgins, a little surprised at mr. hale\"s agitation.
　　\"i would na ask for work for mysel\"; but them\"s left as a charge on me. ireckon, i would ha guided boucher to a better end; but i set him off o\"
　　th\" road, and so i mun answer for him.\"
　　mr. hale got hold of higgins\"s hand and shook it heartily, withoutspeaking. higgins looked awkward and ashamed.
　　\"theer, theer, master! theer\"s ne\"er a man, to call a man, amongst us, butwhat would do th\" same; ay, and better too; for, belie\" me, i\"se ne\"er got astroke o\" work, nor yet a sight of any. for all i telled hamper that, letalone his pledge--which i would not sign--no, i could na, not e\"en forthis--he\"d ne\"er ha\" such a worker on his mill as i would be--he\"d ha\"
　　none o\" me--no more would none o\" th\" others. i\"m a poor black fecklesssheep--childer may clem for aught i can do, unless, parson, yo\"d helpme?\"
　　\"help you! how? i would do anything,--but what can i do?\"
　　\"miss there\"--for margaret had re-entered the room, and stood silent,listening--\"has often talked grand o\" the south, and the ways down there.
　　now i dunnot know how far off it is, but i\"ve been thinking if i couldget \"em down theer, where food is cheap and wages good, and all thefolk, rich and poor, master and man, friendly like; yo\" could, may be,help me to work. i\"m not forty-five, and i\"ve a deal o\" strength in me,measter.\"
　　\"but what kind of work could you do, my man?\"
　　\"well, i reckon i could spade a bit----\"
　　\"and for that,\" said margaret, stepping forwards, \"for anything you coulddo, higgins, with the best will in the world, you would, may be, getnine shillings a week; may be ten, at the outside. food is much the sameas here, except that you might have a little garden----\"
　　\"the childer could work at that,\" said he. \"i\"m sick o\" milton anyways,and milton is sick o\" me.\"
　　\"you must not go to the south,\" said margaret, \"for all that. you couldnot stand it. you would have to be out all weathers. it would kill youwith rheumatism. the mere bodily work at your time of life wouldbreak you down. the fare is far different to what you have beenaccustomed to.\"
　　\"i\"se nought particular about my meat,\" said he, as if offended.
　　\"but you\"ve reckoned on having butcher\"s meat once a day, if you\"re inwork; pay for that out of your ten shillings, and keep those poorchildren if you can. i owe it to you--since it\"s my way of talking that hasset you off on this idea--to put it all clear before you. you would notbear the dulness of the life; you don\"t know what it is; it would eat youaway like rust. those that have lived there all their lives, are used tosoaking in the stagnant waters. they labour on, from day to day, in thegreat solitude of steaming fields--never speaking or lifting up theirpoor, bent, downcast heads. the hard spade-work robs their brain oflife; the sameness of their toil deadens their imagination; they don\"t careto meet to talk over thoughts and speculations, even of the weakest,wildest kind, after their work is done; they go home brutishly tired, poorcreatures! caring for nothing but food and rest. you could not stir themup into any companionship, which you get in a town as plentiful as theair you breathe, whether it be good or bad--and that i don\"t know; but ido know, that you of all men are not one to bear a life among suchlabourers. what would be peace to them would be eternal fretting toyou. think no more of it, nicholas, i beg. besides, you could never payto get mother and children all there--that\"s one good thing.\"
　　\"i\"ve reckoned for that. one house mun do for us a\", and the furniture o\"
　　t\"other would go a good way. and men theer mun have their families tokeep--mappen six or seven childer. god help \"em!\" said he, moreconvinced by his own presentation of the facts than by all margaret hadsaid, and suddenly renouncing the idea, which had but recently formeditself in a brain worn out by the day\"s fatigue and anxiety. \"god help\"em! north an\" south have each getten their own troubles. if work\"s sureand steady theer, labour\"s paid at starvation prices; while here we\"nrucks o\" money coming in one quarter, and ne\"er a farthing th\" next. forsure, th\" world is in a confusion that passes me or any other man tounderstand; it needs fettling, and who\"s to fettle it, if it\"s as yon folkssay, and there\"s nought but what we see?\"




第126章 CHAPTER XII LOOKING SOUTH (4)


　　mr. hale was busy cutting bread and butter; margaret was glad of this,for she saw that higgins was better left to himself: that if her fatherbegan to speak ever so mildly on the subject of higgins\"s thoughts, thelatter would consider himself challenged to an argument, and wouldfeel himself bound to maintain his own ground. she and her father keptup an indifferent conversation until higgins, scarcely aware whether heate or not, had made a very substantial meal. then he pushed his chairaway from the table, and tried to take an interest in what they weresaying; but it was of no use; and he fell back into dreamy gloom.
　　suddenly, margaret said (she had been thinking of it for some time, butthe words had stuck in her throat), \"higgins, have you been tomarlborough mills to seek for work?\"
　　\"thornton\"s?\" asked he. \"ay, i\"ve been at thornton\"s.\"
　　\"and what did he say?\"
　　\"such a chap as me is not like to see the measter. th\" o\"erlooker bid mego and be d----d.\"
　　\"i wish you had seen mr. thornton,\" said mr. hale. \"he might not havegiven you work, but he would not have used such language.\"
　　\"as to th\" language, i\"m welly used to it; it dunnot matter to me. i\"m notnesh mysel\" when i\"m put out. it were th\" fact that i were na wantedtheer, no more nor ony other place, as i minded.\"
　　\"but i wish you had seen mr. thornton,\" repeated margaret. \"would yougo again--it\"s a good deal to ask, i know--but would you go to-morrowand try him? i should be so glad if you would.\"
　　\"i\"m afraid it would be of no use,\" said mr. hale, in a low voice. \"itwould be better to let me speak to him.\" margaret still looked at higginsfor his answer. those grave soft eyes of hers were difficult to resist. hegave a great sigh.
　　\"it would tax my pride above a bit; if it were for mysel\", i could stand adeal o\" clemming first; i\"d sooner knock him down than ask a favourfrom him. i\"d a deal sooner be flogged mysel\"; but yo\"re not a commonwench, axing yo\"r pardon, nor yet have yo\" common ways about yo\". i\"lle\"en make a wry face, and go at it to-morrow. dunna yo\" think that he\"lldo it. that man has it in him to be burnt at the stake afore he\"ll give in. ido it for yo\"r sake, miss hale, and it\"s first time in my life as e\"er i giveway to a woman. neither my wife nor bess could e\"er say that muchagain me.\"
　　\"all the more do i thank you,\" said margaret, smiling. \"though i don\"tbelieve you: i believe you have just given way to wife and daughter asmuch as most men.\"
　　\"and as to mr. thornton,\" said mr. hale, \"i\"ll give you a note to him,which, i think i may venture to say, will ensure you a hearing.\"
　　\"i thank yo\" kindly, sir, but i\"d as lief stand on my own bottom. i dunnotstomach the notion of having favour curried for me, by one as doesn\"tknow the ins and outs of the quarrel. meddling \"twixt master and man isliker meddling \"twixt husband and wife than aught else: it takes a deal o\"
　　wisdom for to do ony good. i\"ll stand guard at the lodge door. i\"ll standthere fro\" six in the morning till i get speech on him. but i\"d liefer sweepth\" streets, if paupers had na\" got hold on that work. dunna yo\" hope,miss. there\"ll be more chance o\" getting milk out of a flint. i wish yo\" avery good night, and many thanks to yo\".\"
　　\"you\"ll find your shoe\"s by the kitchen fire; i took them there to dry,\"
　　said margaret.
　　he turned round and looked at her steadily, and then he brushed his leanhand across his eyes and went his way.
　　\"how proud that man is!\" said her father, who was a little annoyed at themanner in which higgins had declined his intercession with mr.
　　thornton.
　　\"he is,\" said margaret; \"but what grand makings of a man there are inhim, pride and all.\"
　　\"it\"s amusing to see how he evidently respects the part in mr. thornton\"scharacter which is like his own.\"
　　\"there\"s granite in all these northern people, papa, is there not?\"
　　\"there was none in poor boucher, i am afraid; none in his wife either.\"
　　\"i should guess from their tones that they had irish blood in them. iwonder what success he\"ll have to-morrow. if he and mr. thorntonwould speak out together as man to man--if higgins would forget thatmr. thornton was a master, and speak to him as he does to us--and ifmr. thornton would be patient enough to listen to him with his humanheart, not with his master\"s ears--\"
　　\"you are getting to do mr. thornton justice at last, margaret,\" said herfather, pinching her ear.
　　margaret had a strange choking at her heart, which made her unable toanswer. \"oh!\" thought she, \"i wish i were a man, that i could go andforce him to express his disapprobation, and tell him honestly that iknew i deserved it. it seems hard to lose him as a friend just when i hadbegun to feel his value. how tender he was with dear mamma! if it wereonly for her sake, i wish he would come, and then at least i shouldknow how much i was abased in his eyes.\"
www.56ｗen．ＣＯＭ



第127章 CHAPTER XIII PROMISES FULFILLED(1)


　　\"then proudly, proudly up she rose,tho\" the tear was in her e\"e,\"whate\"er ye say, think what ye may,ye\"s get na word frae me!\"\"
　　scotch ballad.
　　it was not merely that margaret was known to mr. thornton to havespoken falsely,--though she imagined that for this reason only was sheso turned in his opinion,--but that this falsehood of hers bore a distinctreference in his mind to some other lover. he could not forget the fondand earnest look that had passed between her and some other man--theattitude of familiar confidence, if not of positive endearment. thethought of this perpetually stung him; it was a picture before his eyes,wherever he went and whatever he was doing. in addition to this (andhe ground his teeth as he remembered it), was the hour, dusky twilight;the place, so far away from home, and comparatively unfrequented. hisnobler self had said at first, that all this last might be accidental,innocent, justifiable; but once allow her right to love and be beloved(and had he any reason to deny her right?--had not her words beenseverely explicit when she cast his love away from her?), she mighteasily have been beguiled into a longer walk, on to a later hour than shehad anticipated. but that falsehood! which showed a fatal consciousnessof something wrong, and to be concealed, which was unlike her. he didher that justice, though all the time it would have been a relief tobelieve her utterly unworthy of his esteem. it was this that made themisery--that he passionately loved her, and thought her, even with allher faults, more lovely and more excellent than any other woman; yethe deemed her so attached to some other man, so led away by heraffection for him as to violate her truthful nature. the very falsehoodthat stained her, was a proof how blindly she loved another--this dark,slight, elegant, handsome man--while he himself was rough, and stern,and strongly made. he lashed himself into an agony of fierce jealousy.
　　he thought of that look, that attitude!--how he would have laid his lifeat her feet for such tender glances, such fond detention! he mocked athimself, for having valued the mechanical way in which she hadprotected him from the fury of the mob; now he had seen how soft andbewitching she looked when with a man she really loved. heremembered, point by point, the sharpness of her words--\"there was nota man in all that crowd for whom she would not have done as much, farmore readily than for him.\" he shared with the mob, in her desire ofaverting bloodshed from them; but this man, this hidden lover, sharedwith nobody; he had looks, words, hand-cleavings, lies, concealment,all to himself.
　　mr. thornton was conscious that he had never been so irritable as hewas now, m all his life long; he felt inclined to give a short abruptanswer, more like a bark than a speech, to every one that asked him aquestion; and this consciousness hurt his pride he had always piquedhimself on his self-control, and control himself he would. so themanner was subdued to a quiet deliberation, but the matter was even
　　harder and sterner than common. he was more than usually silent athome; employing his evenings in a continual pace backwards andforwards, which would have annoyed his mother exceedingly if it hadbeen practised by any one else; and did not tend to promote anyforbearance on her part even to this beloved son.
　　\"can you stop--can you sit down for a moment? i have something to sayto you, if you would give up that everlasting walk, walk, walk.\"
　　he sat down instantly, on a chair against the wall.
　　\"i want to speak to you about betsy. she says she must leave us; that herlover\"s death has so affected her spirits she can\"t give her heart to herwork.\"
　　\"very well. i suppose other cooks are to be met with.\"
　　\"that\"s so like a man. it\"s not merely the cooking, it is that she knows allthe ways of the house. besides, she tells me something about yourfriend miss hale.\"
　　\"miss hale is no friend of mine. mr. hale is my friend.\"
　　\"i am glad to hear you say so, for if she had been your friend, whatbetsy says would have annoyed you.\"
　　\"let me hear it,\" said he, with the extreme quietness of manner he hadbeen assuming for the last few days.
　　\"betsy says, that the night on which her lover--i forget his name--for shealways calls him \"he\"----\"
　　\"leonards.\"
　　\"the night on which leonards was last seen at the station--when he waslast seen on duty, in fact--miss hale was there, walking about with ayoung man who, betsy believes, killed leonards by some blow orpush.\"
　　\"leonards was not killed by any blow or push.\"
　　\"how do you know?\"
　　\"because i distinctly put the question to the surgeon of the infirmary. hetold me there was an internal disease of long standing, caused byleonards\" habit of drinking to excess; that the fact of his becomingrapidly worse while in a state of intoxication, settled the question as towhether the last fatal attack was caused by excess of drinking, or thefall.\"
　　\"the fall! what fall?\"
　　\"caused by the blow or push of which betsy speaks.\"
　　\"then there was a blow or push?\"
　　\"i believe so.\"
　　\"and who did it?\"
　　\"as there was no inquest, in consequence of the doctor\"s opinion, icannot tell you.\"
　　\"but miss hale was there?\"
　　no answer.
　　\"and with a young man?\"
　　still no answer. at last he said: \"i tell you, mother, that there was noinquest--no inquiry. no judicial inquiry, i mean.\"
　　\"betsy says that woolmer (some man she knows, who is in a grocer\"sshop out at crampton) can swear that miss hale was at the station atthat hour, walking backwards and forwards with a young man.\"
　　\"i don\"t see what we have to do with that. miss hale is at liberty toplease herself.\"
　　\"i\"m glad to hear you say so,\" said mrs. thornton, eagerly. \"it certainlysignifies very little to us--not at all to you, after what has passed! but i-imade a promise to mrs. hale, that i would not allow her daughter togo wrong without advising and remonstrating with her. i shall certainlylet her know my opinion of such conduct.\"
　　\"i do not see any harm in what she did that evening,\" said mr. thornton,getting up, and coming near to his mother; he stood by the chimney-piece with his face turned away from the room.
wwＷ．7wenxue.com下 & 书 & 网



第128章 CHAPTER XIII PROMISES FULFILLED(2)


　　\"you would not have approved of fanny\"s being seen out, after dark, inrather a lonely place, walking about with a young man. i say nothing ofthe taste which could choose the time, when her mother lay unburied,for such a promenade. should you have liked your sister to have beennoticed by a grocer\"s assistant for doing so?\"
　　\"in the first place, as it is not many years since i myself was a draper\"sassistant, the mere circumstance of a grocer\"s assistant noticing any actdoes not alter the character of the act to me. and in the next place, i seea great deal of difference between miss hale and fanny. i can imaginethat the one may have weighty reasons, which may and ought to makeher overlook any seeming impropriety in her conduct. i never knewfanny have weighty reasons for anything. other people must guard her.
　　i believe miss hale is a guardian to herself\"
　　\"a pretty character of your sister, indeed! really, john, one would havethought miss hale had done enough to make you clear-sighted. shedrew you on to an offer, by a bold display of pretended regard for you,-toplay you off against this very young man, i\"ve no doubt. her wholeconduct is clear to me now. you believe he is her lover, i suppose--youagree to that.\"
　　he turned round to his mother; his face was very gray and grim. \"yes,mother. i do believe he is her lover.\" when he had spoken, he turnedround again; he writhed himself about, like one in bodily pain. he leanthis face against his hand. then before she could speak, he turned sharpagain:
　　\"mother. he is her lover, whoever he is; but she may need help andwomanly counsel;--there may be difficulties or temptations which i
　　don\"t know. i fear there are. i don\"t want to know what they are; but asyou have ever been a good--ay! and a tender mother to me, go to her,and gain her confidence, and tell her what is best to be done. i knowthat something is wrong; some dread, must be a terrible torture to her.\"
　　\"for god\"s sake, john!\" said his mother, now really shocked, \"what doyou mean? what do you mean? what do you know?\"
　　he did not reply to her.
　　\"john! i don\"t know what i shan\"t think unless you speak. you have noright to say what you have done against her.\"
　　\"not against her, mother! i could not speak against her.\"
　　\"well! you have no right to say what you have done, unless you saymore. these half-expressions are what ruin a woman\"s character.\"
　　\"her character! mother, you do not dare--\" he faced about, and lookedinto her face with his flaming eyes. then, drawing himself up intodetermined composure and dignity, he said, \"i will not say any morethan this, which is neither more nor less than the simple truth, and i amsure you believe me,--i have good reason to believe, that miss hale isin some strait and difficulty connected with an attachment which, ofitself, from my knowledge of miss hale\"s character, is perfectlyinnocent and right. what my reason is, i refuse to tell. but never let mehear any one say a word against her, implying any more seriousimputation than that she now needs the counsel of some kind and gentlewoman. you promised mrs. hale to be that woman!\"
　　no!\" said mrs. thornton. \"i am happy to say, i did not promise kindnessand gentleness, for i felt at the time that it might be out of my power torender these to one of miss hale\"s character and disposition. i promisedcounsel and advice, such as i would give to my own daughter; i shallspeak to her as i would do to fanny, if she had gone gallivanting with ayoung man in the dusk. i shall speak with relation to the circumstances iknow, without being influenced either one way or another by the\"strong reasons\" which you will not confide to me. then i shall havefulfilled my promise, and done my duty.\"
　　\"she will never bear it,\" said he passionately.
　　\"she will have to bear it, if i speak in her dead mother\"s name.\"
　　\"well!\" said he, breaking away, \"don\"t tell me any more about it. i cannotendure to think of it. it will be better that you should speak to her anyway, than that she should not be spoken to at all.--oh! that look oflove!\" continued he, between his teeth, as he bolted himself into his ownprivate room. \"and that cursed lie; which showed some terrible shamein the background, to be kept from the light in which i thought she livedperpetually! oh, margaret, margaret! mother, how you have torturedme! oh! margaret, could you not have loved me? i am but uncouth andhard, but i would never have led you into any falsehood for me.\"
　　the more mrs. thornton thought over what her son had said, inpleading for a merciful judgment for margaret\"s indiscretion, the morebitterly she felt inclined towards her. she took a savage pleasure in theidea of \"speaking her mind\" to her, in the guise of fulfilment of a duty.
　　she enjoyed the thought of showing herself untouched by the \"glamour,\"
　　which she was well aware margaret had the power of throwing overmany people. she snorted scornfully over the picture of the beauty ofher victim; her jet black hair, her clear smooth skin, her lucid eyeswould not help to save her one word of the just and stern reproachwhich mrs. thornton spent half the night in preparing to her mind.
　　\"is miss hale within?\" she knew she was, for she had seen her at thewindow, and she had her feet inside the little hall before martha hadhalf answered her question.
　　margaret was sitting alone, writing to edith, and giving her manyparticulars of her mother\"s last days. it was a softening employment,and she had to brush away the unbidden tears as mrs. thornton wasannounced.
　　she was so gentle and ladylike in her mode of reception that her visitorwas somewhat daunted; and it became impossible to utter the speech, soeasy of arrangement with no one to address it to. margaret\"s low richvoice was softer than usual; her manner more gracious, because in herheart she was feeling very grateful to mrs. thornton for the courteousattention of her call. she exerted herself to find subjects of interest forconversation; praised martha, the servant whom mrs. thornton hadfound for them; had asked edith for a little greek air, about which shehad spoken to miss thornton. mrs. thornton was fairly discomfited.




第129章 CHAPTER XIII PROMISES FULFILLED(3)


　　her sharp damascus blade seemed out of place, and useless among rose-leaves. she was silent, because she was trying to task herself up to herduty at last, she stung herself into its performance by a suspicionwhich, in spite of all probability, she allowed to cross her mind, that allthis sweetness was put on with a view of propitiating mr. thornton;that, somehow, the other attachment had fallen through, and that itsuited miss hale\"s purpose to recall her rejected lover. poor margaret!
　　there was perhaps so much truth in the suspicion as this: that mrs.
　　thornton was the mother of one whose regard she valued, and feared tohave lost; and this thought unconsciously added to her natural desire ofpleasing one who was showing her kindness by her visit. mrs. thorntonstood up to go, but yet she seemed to have something more to say. shecleared her throat and began:
　　\"miss hale, i have a duty to perform. i promised your poor mother that,as far as my poor judgment went, i would not allow you to act in anyway wrongly, or (she softened her speech down a little here)inadvertently, without remonstrating; at least, without offering advice,
　　whether you took it or not.\"
　　margaret stood before her, blushing like any culprit, with her eyesdilating as she gazed at mrs. thornton. she thought she had come tospeak to her about the falsehood she had told--that mr. thornton hademployed her to explain the danger she had exposed herself to, of beingconfuted in full court! and although her heart sank to think he had notrather chosen to come himself, and upbraid her, and receive herpenitence, and restore her again to his good opinion, yet she was toomuch humbled not to bear any blame on this subject patiently andmeekly.
　　mrs. thornton went on:
　　\"at first, when i heard from one of my servants, that you had been seenwalking about with a gentleman, so far from home as the outwoodstation, at such a time of the evening, i could hardly believe it. but myson, i am sorry to say, confirmed her story. it was indiscreet, to say theleast; many a young woman has lost her character before now----\"
　　margaret\"s eyes flashed fire. this was a new idea--this was tooinsulting. if mrs. thornton had spoken to her about the lie she had told,well and good--she would have owned it, and humiliated herself but tointerfere with her conduct--to speak of her character! she--mrs.
　　thornton, a mere stranger--it was too impertinent! she would notanswer her--not one word. mrs. thornton saw the battle-spirit inmargaret\"s eyes, and it called. up her combativeness also.
　　\"for your mother\"s sake, i have thought it right to warn you against suchimproprieties; they must degrade you in the long run in the estimationof the world, even if in fact they do not lead you to positive harm.\"
　　\"for my mother\"s sake,\" said margaret, in a tearful voice, \"i will bearmuch; but i cannot bear everything. she never meant me to be exposedto insult, i am sure.\"
　　\"insult, miss hale!\"
　　\"yes, madam,\" said margaret more steadily, \"it is insult. what do youknow of me that should lead you to suspect--oh!\" said she, breakingdown, and covering her face with her hands--\"i know now, mr.
　　thornton has told you----\"
　　\"no, miss hale,\" said mrs. thornton, her truthfulness causing her toarrest the confession margaret was on the point of making, though hercuriosity was itching to hear it. \"stop. mr. thornton has told menothing. you do not know my son. you are not worthy to know him.
　　he said this. listen, young lady, that you may understand, if you can,what sort of a man you rejected. this milton manufacturer, his greattender heart scorned as it was scorned, said to me only last night, \"go toher. i have good reason to know that she is in some strait, arising out ofsome attachment; and she needs womanly counsel.\" i believe those
　　were his very words. farther than that--beyond admitting the fact ofyour being at the outwood station with a gentleman, on the evening ofthe twenty-sixth--he has said nothing--not one word against you. if hehas knowledge of anything which should make you sob so, he keeps itto himself.\"
　　margaret\"s face was still hidden in her hands, the fingers of which werewet with tears. mrs. thornton was a little mollified.
　　\"come, miss hale. there may be circumstances, i\"ll allow, that, ifexplained, may take off from the seeming impropriety.\"
　　still no answer. margaret was considering what to say; she wished tostand well with mrs. thornton; and yet she could not, might not, giveany explanation. mrs. thornton grew impatient.
　　\"i shall be sorry to break off an acquaintance; but for fanny\"s sake--as itold my son, if fanny had done so we should consider it a great disgrace-and fanny might be led away----\"
　　\"i can give you no explanation,\" said margaret, in a low voice. \"i havedone wrong, but not in the way you think or know about. i think mr.
　　thornton judges me more mercifully than you;\"--she had hard work tokeep herself from choking with her tears--\"but, i believe, madam, youmean to do rightly.\"
　　\"thank you,\" said mrs. thornton, drawing herself up; \"i was not awarethat my meaning was doubted. it is the last time i shall interfere. i wasunwilling to consent to do it, when your mother asked me. i had notapproved of my son\"s attachment to you, while i only suspected it. youdid not appear to me worthy of him. but when you compromisedyourself as you did at the time of the riot, and exposed yourself to thecomments of servants and workpeople, i felt it was no longer right toset myself against my son\"s wish of proposing to you--a wish, by theway, which he had always denied entertaining until the day of the riot.\"
　　margaret winced, and drew in her breath with a long, hissing sound; ofwhich, however, mrs. thornton took no notice. \"he came; you hadapparently changed your mind. i told my son yesterday, that i thought itpossible, short as was the interval, you might have heard or learntsomething of this other lover----\"
　　\"what must you think of me, madam?\" asked margaret, throwing herhead back with proud disdain, till her throat curved outwards like aswan\"s. \"you can say nothing more, mrs. thornton. i decline everyattempt to justify myself for anything. you must allow me to leave theroom.\"
　　and she swept out of it with the noiseless grace of an offended princess.
www.xiabook.comwww.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ



第130章 CHAPTER XIII PROMISES FULFILLED(4)


　　mrs. thornton had quite enough of natural humour to make her feel theludicrousness of the position in which she was left. there was nothingfor it but to show herself out. she was not particularly annoyed at
　　margaret\"s way of behaving. she did not care enough for her for that.
　　she had taken mrs. thornton\"s remonstrance to the full as keenly toheart as that lady expected; and margaret\"s passion at once mollified hervisitor, far more than any silence or reserve could have done. it showedthe effect of her words. \"my young lady,\" thought mrs. thornton toherself; \"you\"ve a pretty good temper of your own. if john and you hadcome together, he would have had to keep a tight hand over you, tomake you know your place. but i don\"t think you will go a-walkingagain with your beau, at such an hour of the day, in a hurry. you\"ve toomuch pride and spirit in you for that. i like to see a girl fly out at thenotion of being talked about. it shows they\"re neither giddy, nor hold bynature. as for that girl, she might be hold, but she\"d never be giddy. i\"lldo her that justice. now as to fanny, she\"d be giddy, and not bold. she\"sno courage in her, poor thing!\"
　　mr. thornton was not spending the morning so satisfactorily as hismother. she, at any rate, was fulfilling her determined purpose. he wastrying to understand where he stood; what damage the strike had donehim. a good deal of his capital was locked up in new and expensivemachinery; and he had also bought cotton largely, with a view to somegreat orders which he had in hand. the strike had thrown him terriblybehindhand, as to the completion of these orders. even with his ownaccustomed and skilled workpeople, he would have had some difficultyin fulfilling his engagements; as it was, the incompetence of the irishhands, who had to be trained to their work, at a time requiring unusualactivity, was a daily annoyance.
　　it was not a favourable hour for higgins to make his request. but he hadpromised margaret to do it at any cost. so, though every moment addedto his repugnance, his pride, and his sullenness of temper, he stoodleaning against the dead wall, hour after hour, first on one leg, then onthe other. at last the latch was sharply lifted, and out came mr.
　　thornton.
　　\"i want for to speak to yo\", sir.\"
　　\"can\"t stay now, my man. i\"m too late as it is.\"
　　\"well, sir, i reckon i can wait till yo\" come back.\"
　　mr. thornton was half way down the street. higgins sighed. but it wasno use. to catch him in the street was his only chance of seeing \"themeaster;\" if he had rung the lodge bell, or even gone up to the house toask for him, he would have been referred to the overlooker. so he stoodstill again, vouchsafing no answer, but a short nod of recognition to thefew men who knew and spoke to him, as the crowd drove out of themillyard at dinner-time, and scowling with all his might at the irish\"knobsticks\" who had just been imported. at last mr. thornton returned.
　　\"what! you there still!\"
　　\"ay, sir. i mun speak to yo\".\"
　　\"come in here, then. stay, we\"ll go across the yard; the men are notcome back, and we shall have it to ourselves. these good people, i see,are at dinner;\" said he, closing the door of the porter\"s lodge.
　　he stopped to speak to the overlooker. the latter said in a low tone:
　　\"i suppose you know, sir, that that man is higgins, one of the leaders ofthe union; he that made that speech in hurstfield.\"
　　\"no, i didn\"t,\" said mr. thornton, looking round sharply at his follower.
　　higgins was known to him by name as a turbulent spirit.
　　\"come along,\" said he, and his tone was rougher than before. \"it is mensuch as this,\" thought he, \"who interrupt commerce and injure the verytown they live in: mere demagogues, lovers of power, at whatever costto others.\"
　　\"well, sir! what do you want with me?\" said mr. thornton, facing roundat him, as soon as they were in the counting-house of the mill.
　　\"my name is higgins\"-\"
　　i know that,\" broke in mr. thornton. \"what do you want, mr. higgins?
　　that\"s the question.\"
　　\"i want work.\"
　　\"work! you\"re a pretty chap to come asking me for work. you don\"twant impudence, that\"s very clear.\"
　　\"i\"ve getten enemies and backbiters, like my betters; but i ne\"er heerd o\"
　　ony of them calling me o\"er-modest,\" said higgins. his blood was a littleroused by mr. thornton\"s manner, more than by his words.
　　mr. thornton saw a letter addressed to himself on the table. he took itup and read it through. at the end, he looked up and said, \"what are youwaiting for?\"
  www.7wenxＵe.com



第131章 CHAPTER XIII PROMISES FULFILLED(5)


　　\"an answer to the question i axed.\"
　　\"i gave it you before. don\"t waste any more of your time.\"
　　\"yo\" made a remark, sir, on my impudence: but i were taught that it wasmanners to say either \"yes\" or \"no,\" when i were axed a civil question. ishould be thankfu\" to yo\" if yo\"d give me work. hamper will speak to mybeing a good hand.\"
　　\"i\"ve a notion you\"d better not send me to hamper to ask for a character,my man. i might hear more than you\"d like.\"
　　\"i\"d take th\" risk. worst they could say of me is, that i did what i thoughtbest, even to my own wrong.\"
　　\"you\"d better go and try them, then, and see whether they\"ll give youwork. i\"ve turned off upwards of a hundred of my best hands, for noother fault than following you and such as you; and d\"ye think i\"ll takeyou on? i might as well put a firebrand into the midst of the cotton-waste.\"
　　higgins turned away; then the recollection of boucher came over him,
　　and he faced round with the greatest concession he could persuadehimself to make.
　　\"i\"d promise yo\", measter, i\"d not speak a word as could do harm, if so beyo\" did right by us; and i\"d promise more: i\"d promise that when i seedyo\" going wrong, and acting unfair, i\"d speak to yo\" in private first; andthat would be a fair warning. if yo\" and i did na agree in our opinion o\"
　　your conduct, yo\" might turn me off at an hour\"s notice.\"
　　\"upon my word, you don\"t think small beer of yourself! hamper has hada loss of you. how came he to let you and your wisdom go?\"
　　\"well, we parted wi\" mutual dissatisfaction. i wouldn\"t gi\"e the pledgethey were asking; and they wouldn\"t have me at no rate. so i\"m free tomake another engagement; and as i said before, though i should na\" sayit, i\"m a good hand, measter, and a steady man--specially when i cankeep fro\" drink; and that i shall do now, if i ne\"er did afore.\"
　　\"that you may have more money laid up for another strike, i suppose?\"
　　\"no! i\"d be thankful if i was free to do that; it\"s for to keep th\" widow andchilder of a man who was drove mad by them knobsticks o\" yourn; putout of his place by a paddy that did na know weft fro\" warp.\"
　　\"well! you\"d better turn to something else, if you\"ve any such goodintention in your head. i shouldn\"t advise you to stay in milton: you\"retoo well known here.\"
　　\"if it were summer,\" said higgins, \"i\"d take to paddy\"s work, and go as anavvy, or haymaking, or summut, and ne\"er see milton again. but it\"swinter, and th\" childer will clem.\"
　　\"a pretty navvy you\"d make! why, you couldn\"t do half a day\"s work atdigging against an irishman.\"
　　\"i\"d only charge half-a-day for th\" twelve hours, if i could only do half-aday\"swork in th\" time. yo\"re not knowing of any place, where theycould gi\" me a trial, away fro\" the mills, if i\"m such a firebrand? i\"d takeany wage they thought i was worth, for the sake of those childer.\"
　　\"don\"t you see what you would be? you\"d be a knobstick. you\"d betaking less wages than the other labourers--all for the sake of anotherman\"s children. think how you\"d abuse any poor fellow who waswilling to take what he could get to keep his own children. you andyour union would soon be down upon him. no! no! if it\"s only for therecollection of the way in which you\"ve used the poor knobsticks beforenow, i say no! to your question. i\"ll not give you work. i won\"t say, idon\"t believe your pretext for coming and asking for work; i knownothing about it. it may be true, or it may not. it\"s a very unlikely story,at any rate. let me pass. i\"ll not give you work. there\"s your answer.\"
　　\"i hear, sir. i would na ha\" troubled yo\", but that i were bid to come, byone as seemed to think yo\"d getten some soft place in, yo\"r heart. hoowere mistook, and i were misled. but i\"m not the first man as is misled
　　by a woman.\"
　　\"tell her to mind her own business the next time, instead of taking upyour time and mine too. i believe women are at the bottom of everyplague in this world. be off with you.\"
　　\"i\"m obleeged to yo\" for a\" yo\"r kindness, measter, and most of a\" for yo\"rcivil way o\" saying good-bye.\"
　　mr. thornton did not deign a reply. but, looking out of the window aminute after, he was struck with the lean, bent figure going out of theyard: the heavy walk was in strange contrast with the resolute, cleardetermination of the man to speak to him. he crossed to the porter\"slodge:
　　\"how long has that man higgins been waiting to speak to me?\"
　　\"he was outside the gate before eight o\"clock, sir. i think he\"s been thereever since.\"
　　\"and it is now--?\"
　　\"just one, sir.\"
　　\"five hours,\" thought mr. thornton; \"it\"s a long time for a man to wait,doing nothing but first hoping and then fearing.\"
www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ  www.7wenxＵe.com



第132章 CHAPTER XIV MAKING FRIENDS (1)


　　\"nay, i have done; you get no more of me:
　　and i am glad, yea glad with all my heart,that thus so clearly i myself am free.\"
　　drayton.
　　margaret shut herself up in her own room, after she had quitted mrs.
　　thornton. she began to walk backwards and forwards, in her oldhabitual way of showing agitation; but, then, remembering that in thatslightly-built house every step was heard from one room to another, shesate down until she heard mrs. thornton go safely out of the house. sheforced herself to recollect all the conversation that had passed betweenthem; speech by speech, she compelled her memory to go through withit. at the end, she rose up, and said to herself, in a melancholy tone:
　　\"at any rate, her words do not touch me; they fall off from me; for i aminnocent of all the motives she attributes to me. but still, it is hard tothink that any one--any woman--can believe all this of another so easily.
　　it is hard and sad. where i have done wrong, she does not accuse me-shedoes not know. he never told her: i might have known he wouldnot!\"
　　she lifted up her head, as if she took pride in any delicacy of feelingwhich mr. thornton had shown. then, as a new thought came acrossher, she pressed her hands tightly together.
　　\"he, too, must take poor frederick for some lover.\" (she blushed as theword passed through her mind.) \"i see it now. it is not merely that heknows of my falsehood, but he believes that some one else cares for me;and that i----oh dear!--oh dear! what shall i do? what do i mean? whydo i care what he thinks, beyond the mere loss of his good opinion asregards my telling the truth or not? i cannot tell. but i am verymiserable! oh, how unhappy this last year has been! i have passed outof childhood into old age. i have had no youth--no womanhood; thehopes of womanhood have closed for me--for i shall never marry; and ianticipate cares and sorrows just as if i were an old woman, and withthe same fearful spirit. i am weary of this continual call upon me forstrength. i could bear up for papa; because that is a natural, pious duty.
　　and i think i could bear up against--at any rate, i could have the energyto resent, mrs. thornton\"s unjust, impertinent suspicions. but it is hardto feel how completely he must misunderstand me. what has happenedto make me so morbid to-day? i do not know. i only know i cannot helpit. i must give way sometimes. no, i will not, though,\" said she,springing to her feet. \"i will not--i will not think of myself and my ownposition. i won\"t examine into my own feelings. it would be of no usenow. some time, if i live to be an old woman, i may sit over the fire,and, looking into the embers, see the life that might have been.\"
　　all this time, she was hastily putting on her things to go out, onlystopping from time to time to wipe her eyes, with an impatience ofgesture at the tears that would come, in spite of all her bravery.
　　\"i dare say, there\"s many a woman makes as sad a mistake as i havedone, and only finds it out too late. and how proudly and impertinentlyi spoke to him that day! but i did not know then. it has come upon melittle by little, and i don\"t know where it began. now i won\"t give way. ishall find it difficult to behave in the same way to him, with thismiserable consciousness upon me; but i will be very calm and veryquiet, and say very little. but, to be sure, i may not see him; he keepsout of our way evidently. that would be worse than all. and yet nowonder that he avoids me, believing what he must about me.\"
　　she went out, going rapidly towards the country, and trying to drown
　　reflection by swiftness of motion.
　　as she stood on the door-step, at her return, her father came up:
　　\"good girl!\" said he. \"you\"ve been to mrs. boucher\"s. i was just meaningto go there, if i had time, before dinner.\"
　　\"no, papa; i have not,\" said margaret, reddening. \"i never thought abouther. but i will go directly after dinner; i will go while you are takingyour nap.
　　accordingly margaret went. mrs. boucher was very ill; really ill--notmerely ailing. the kind and sensible neighbour, who had come in theother day, seemed to have taken charge of everything. some of thechildren were gone to the neighbours. mary higgins had come for thethree youngest at dinner-time; and since then nicholas had gone for thedoctor. he had not come as yet; mrs. boucher was dying; and there wasnothing to do but to wait. margaret thought that she should like to knowhis opinion, and that she could not do better than go and see thehigginses in the meantime. she might then possibly hear whethernicholas had been able to make his application to mr. thornton.
　　she found nicholas busily engaged in making a penny spin on thedresser, for the amusement of three little children, who were clinging tohim in a fearless manner. he, as well as they, was smiling at a goodlong spin; and margaret thought, that the happy look of interest in hisoccupation was a good sign. when the penny stopped spinning, \"lilejohnnie\" began to cry.
　　\"come to me,\" said margaret, taking him off the dresser, and holdinghim in her arms; she held her watch to his ear, while she asked nicholasif he had seen mr. thornton.
　　the look on his face changed instantly.
　　\"ay!\" said he. \"i\"ve seen and heerd too much on him.\"
　　\"he refused you, then?\" said margaret, sorrowfully.
　　\"to be sure. i knew he\"d do it all long. it\"s no good expecting marcy atthe hands o\" them measters. yo\"re a stranger and a foreigner, and aren\"tlikely to know their ways; but i knowed it.\"
　　\"i am sorry i asked you. was he angry? he did not speak to you ashamper did, did he?\"
　　\"he weren\"t o\"er-civil!\" said nicholas, spinning the penny again, as muchfor his own amusement as for that of the children. \"never yo\" fret, i\"monly where i was. i\"ll go on tramp to-morrow. i gave him as good as igot. i telled him, i\"d not that good opinion on him that i\"d ha\" come asecond time of mysel\"; but yo\"d advised me for to come, and i werebeholden to yo\".\"
　　\"you told him i sent you?\"
　　\"i dunno\" if i ca\"d yo\" by your name. i dunnot think i did. i said, awoman who knew no better had advised me for to come and see if there
　　was a soft place in his heart.\"
　　\"and he--?\" asked margaret.
　　\"said i were to tell yo\" to mind yo\"r own business.--that\"s the longestspin yet, my lads.--and them\"s civil words to what he used to me. butne\"er mind. we\"re but where we was; and i\"ll break stones on th\" roadafore i let these little uns clem.\"
　　margaret put the struggling johnnie out of her arms, back into hisformer place on the dresser.




第133章 CHAPTER XIV MAKING FRIENDS (2)


　　\"i am sorry i asked you to go to mr. thornton\"s. i am disappointed inhim.\"
　　there was a slight noise behind her. both she and nicholas turnedround at the same moment, and there stood mr. thornton, with a lookof displeased surprise upon his face. obeying her swift impulse,margaret passed out before him, saying not a word, only bowing low tohide the sudden paleness that she felt had come over her face. he bentequally low in return, and then closed the door after her. as she hurriedto mrs. boucher\"s, she heard the clang, and it seemed to fill up themeasure of her mortification. he too was annoyed to find her there. hehad tenderness in his heart--\"a soft place,\" as nicholas higgins called it;but he had some pride in concealing it; he kept it very sacred and safe,and was jealous of every circumstance that tried to gain admission. butif he dreaded exposure of his tenderness, he was equally desirous thatall men should recognise his justice; and he felt that he had been unjust,in giving so scornful a hearing to any one who had waited, with humblepatience, for five hours, to speak to him. that the man had spokensaucily to him when he had the opportunity, was nothing to mr.
　　thornton. he rather liked him for it; and he was conscious of his ownirritability of temper at the time, which probably made them both quits.
　　it was the five hours of waiting that struck mr. thornton. he had notfive hours to spare himself; but one hour--two hours, of his hardpenetrating intellectual, as well as bodily labour, did he give up to goingabout collecting evidence as to the truth of higgins\"s story, the nature ofhis character, the tenor of his life. he tried not to be, but was convincedthat all that higgins had said. was true. and then the conviction went in,as if by some spell, and touched the latent tenderness of his heart; thepatience of the man, the simple generosity of the motive (for he hadlearnt about the quarrel between boucher and higgins), made himforget entirely the mere reasonings of justice, and overleap them by adiviner instinct. he came to tell higgins he would give him work; andhe was more annoyed to find margaret there than by hearing her lastwords, for then he understood that she was the woman who had urgedhiggins to come to him; and he dreaded the admission of any thoughtof her, as a motive to what he was doing solely because it was right.
　　\"so that was the lady you spoke of as a woman?\" said he indignantly tohiggins. \"you might have told me who she was.
　　\"and then, maybe, yo\"d ha\" spoken of her more civil than yo\" did; yo\"dgetten a mother who might ha\" kept yo\"r tongue in check when yo\" weretalking o\" women being at the root o\" all the plagues.\"
　　\"of course you told that to miss hale?\"
　　\"in coorse i did. leastways, i reckon i did. i telled her she weren\"t tomeddle again in aught that concerned yo\".\"
　　\"whose children are those--yours?\" mr. thornton had a pretty goodnotion whose they were, from what he had heard; but he felt awkwardin turning the conversation round from this unpromising beginning.
　　\"they\"re not mine, and they are mine.\"
　　\"they are the children you spoke of to me this morning?\"
　　\"when yo\" said,\" replied higgins, turning round, with ill-smotheredfierceness, \"that my story might be true or might not, bur it were a veryunlikely one. measter, i\"ve not forgetten.\"
　　mr. thornton was silent for a moment; then he said: \"no more have i. iremember what i said. i spoke to you about those children in a way ihad no business to do. i did not believe you. i could not have taken careof another man\"s children myself, if he had acted towards me as i hearboucher did towards you. but i know now that you spoke truth. i begyour pardon.\"
　　higgins did not turn round, or immediately respond to this. but when hedid speak, it was in a softened tone, although the words were gruffenough.
　　\"yo\"ve no business to go prying into what happened between boucherand me. he\"s dead, and i\"m sorry. that\"s enough.\"
　　\"so it is. will you take work with me? that\"s what i came to ask.\"
　　higgins\"s obstinacy wavered, recovered strength, and stood firm. hewould not speak. mr. thornton would not ask again. higgins\"s eye fellon the children.
　　\"yo\"ve called me impudent, and a liar, and a mischief-maker, and yo\"
　　might ha\" said wi\" some truth, as i were now and then given to drink.
　　an\" i ha\" called you a tyrant, an\" an oud bull-dog, and a hard, cruelmaster; that\"s where it stands. but for th\" childer. measter, do yo\" thinkwe can e\"er get on together?\"
　　\"well!\" said mr. thornton, half-laughing, \"it was not my proposal thatwe should go together. but there\"s one comfort, on your own showing.
　　we neither of us can think much worse of the other than we do now.\"
　　\"that\"s true,\" said higgins, reflectively. \"i\"ve been thinking, ever sin\" isaw you, what a marcy it were yo\" did na take me on, for that i ne\"er sawa man whom i could less abide. but that\"s maybe been a hastyjudgment; and work\"s work to such as me. so, measter, i\"ll come; and
　　what\"s more, i thank yo\"; and that\"s a deal fro\" me,\" said he, more frankly,suddenly turning round and facing mr. thornton fully for the first time.
　　\"and this is a deal from me,\" said mr. thornton, giving higgins\"s hand agood grip. \"now mind you come sharp to your time,\" continued he,resuming the master. \"i\"ll have no laggards at my mill. what fines wehave, we keep pretty sharply. and the first time i catch you makingmischief, off you go. so now you know where you are.\"
　　\"yo\" spoke of my wisdom this morning. i reckon i may bring it wi\" me;or would yo\" rayther have me \"bout my brains?\"
　　\"\"bout your brains if you use them for meddling with my business; withyour brains if you can keep them to your own.\"
　　\"i shall need a deal o\" brains to settle where my business ends and yo\"rsbegins.\"
　　\"your business has not begun yet, and mine stands still for me. so goodafternoon.\"
　　just before mr. thornton came up to mrs. boucher\"s door, margaretcame out of it. she did not see him; and he followed her for severalyards, admiring her light and easy walk, and her tall and graceful figure.




第134章 CHAPTER XIV MAKING FRIENDS (3)


　　but, suddenly, this simple emotion of pleasure was tainted, poisoned byjealousy. he wished to overtake her, and speak to her, to see how shewould receive him, now she must know he was aware of some otherattachment. he wished too, but of this wish he was rather ashamed, thatshe should know that he had justified her wisdom in sending higgins tohim to ask for work; and had repented him of his morning\"s decision.
　　he came up to her. she started.
　　\"allow me to say, miss hale, that you were rather premature inexpressing your disappointment. i have taken higgins on.\"
　　\"i am glad of it,\" said she, coldly.
　　\"he tells me, he repeated to you, what i said this morning about--\" mr.
　　thornton hesitated. margaret took it up:
　　\"about women not meddling. you had a perfect right to express youropinion, which was a very correct one, i have no doubt. but,\" she wenton a little more eagerly, \"higgins did not quite tell you the exact truth.\"
　　the word \"truth,\" reminded her of her own untruth, and she stoppedshort, feeling exceedingly uncomfortable.
　　mr. thornton at first was puzzled to account for her silence; and then heremembered the lie she had told, and all that was foregone. \"the exacttruth!\" said he. \"very few people do speak the exact truth. i have givenup hoping for it. miss hale, have you no explanation to give me? youmust perceive what i cannot but think.\"
　　margaret was silent. she was wondering whether an explanation of anykind would be consistent with her loyalty to frederick.
　　\"nay,\" said he, \"i will ask no farther. i may be putting temptation in your
　　way. at present, believe me, your secret is safe with me. but you rungreat risks, allow me to say, in being so indiscreet. i am now onlyspeaking as a friend of your father\"s: if i had any other thought or hope,of course that is at an end. i am quite disinterested.\"
　　\"i am aware of that,\" said margaret, forcing herself to speak in anindifferent, careless way. \"i am aware of what i must appear to you, butthe secret is another person\"s, and i cannot explain it without doing himharm.\"
　　\"i have not the slightest wish to pry into the gentleman\"s secrets,\" he said,with growing anger. \"my own interest in you is--simply that of a friend.
　　you may not believe me, miss hale, but it is--in spite of the persecutioni\"m afraid i threatened you with at one time--but that is all given up; allpassed away. you believe me, miss hale?\"
　　\"yes,\" said margaret, quietly and sadly.
　　\"then, really, i don\"t see any occasion for us to go on walking together. ithought, perhaps you might have had something to say, but i see we arenothing to each other. if you\"re quite convinced, that any foolish passionon my part is entirely over, i will wish you good afternoon.\" he walkedoff very hastily.
　　\"what can he mean?\" thought margaret,--\"what could he mean byspeaking so, as if i were always thinking that he cared for me, when iknow he does not; he cannot. his mother will have said all those cruelthings about me to him. but i won\"t care for him. i surely am mistressenough of myself to control this wild, strange, miserable feeling, whichtempted me even to betray my own dear frederick, so that i might butregain his good opinion--the good opinion of a man who takes suchpains to tell me that i am nothing to him. come poor little heart! becheery and brave. we\"ll be a great deal to one another, if we are thrownoff and left desolate.\"
　　her father was almost startled by her merriment this afternoon. shetalked incessantly, and forced her natural humour to an unusual pitch;and if there was a tinge of bitterness in much of what she said; if heraccounts of the old harley street set were a little sarcastic, her fathercould not bear to check her, as he would have done at another time--forhe was glad to see her shake off her cares. in the middle of the evening,she was called down to speak to mary higgins; and when she cameback, mr. hale imagined that he saw traces of tears on her cheeks. butthat could not be, for she brought good news--that higgins had gotwork at mr. thornton\"s mill. her spirits were damped, at any rate, andshe found it very difficult to go on talking at all, much more in the wildway that she had done. for some days her spirits varied strangely; andher father was beginning to be anxious about her, when news arrivedfrom one or two quarters that promised some change and variety for
　　her. mr. hale received a letter from mr. bell, in which that gentlemanvolunteered a visit to them; and mr. hale imagined that the promisedsociety of his old oxford friend would give as agreeable a turn tomargaret\"s ideas as it did to his own. margaret tried to take an interestin what pleased her father; but she was too languid to care about anymr. bell, even though he were twenty times her godfather. she wasmore roused by a letter from edith, full of sympathy about her aunt\"sdeath; full of details about herself, her husband, and child; and at theend saying, that as the climate did not suit, the baby, and as mrs. shawwas talking of returning to england, she thought it probable thatcaptain lennox might sell out, and that they might all go and live againin the old harley street house; which, however, would seem veryincomplete with-out margaret. margaret yearned after that old house,and the placid tranquillity of that old well-ordered, monotonous life.
　　she had found it occasionally tiresome while it lasted; but since thenshe had been buffeted about, and felt so exhausted by this recentstruggle with herself, that she thought that even stagnation would be arest and a refreshment. so she began to look towards a long visit to thelennoxes, on their return to england, as to a point--no, not of hope--butof leisure, in which she could regain her power and command overherself. at present it seemed to her as if all subjects tended towards mr.
　　thornton; as if she could not for-get him with all her endeavours. if shewent to see the higginses, she heard of him there; her father hadresumed their readings together, and quoted his opinions perpetually;even mr. bell\"s visit brought his tenant\"s name upon the tapis; for hewrote word that he believed he must be occupied some great part of histime with mr. thornton, as a new lease was in preparation, and theterms of it must be agreed upon.




第135章 CHAPTER XV OUT OF TUNE (1)


　　\"i have no wrong, where i can claim no right,naught ta\"en me fro, where i have nothing had,yet of my woe i cannot so be quite;
　　namely, since that another may he gladwith that, that thus in sorrow makes me sad.\"
　　wyatt.
　　margaret had not expected much pleasure to herself from mr. bell\"svisit--she had only looked forward to it on her father\"s account, butwhen her godfather came, she at once fell into the most natural positionof friendship in the world. he said she had no merit in being what shewas, a girl so entirely after his own heart; it was an hereditary powerwhich she had, to walk in and take possession of his regard; while she,in reply, gave him much credit for being so fresh and young under hisfellow\"s cap and gown.
　　\"fresh and young in warmth and kindness, i mean. i\"m afraid i mustown, that i think your opinions are the oldest and mustiest i have metwith this long time.\"
　　\"hear this daughter of yours, hale her residence in milton has quitecorrupted her. she\"s a democrat, a red republican, a member of thepeace society, a socialist--\"
　　\"papa, it\"s all because i\"m standing up for the progress of commerce. mr.
　　bell would have had it keep still at exchanging wild-beast skins foracorns.\"
　　\"no, no. i\"d dig the ground and grow potatoes. and i\"d shave the wild-beast skins and make the wool into broad cloth. don\"t exaggerate,missy. but i\"m tired of this bustle. everybody rushing over everybody,in their hurry to get rich.\"
　　\"it is not every one who can sit comfortably in a set of college rooms,and let his riches grow without any exertion of his own. no doubt thereis many a man here who would be thankful if his property wouldincrease as yours has done, without his taking any trouble about it,\" saidmr. hale.
　　\"i don\"t believe they would. it\"s the bustle and the struggle they like. asfor sitting still, and learning from the past, or shaping out the future byfaithful work done in a prophetic spirit--why! pooh! i don\"t believethere\"s a man in milton who knows how to sit still; and it is a great art.\"
　　\"milton people, i suspect, think oxford men don\"t know how to move. itwould be a very good thing if they mixed a little more.\"
　　\"it might be good for the miltoners. many things might be good forthem which would be very disagreeable for other people.\"
　　\"are you not a milton man yourself?\" asked margaret. \"i should havethought you would have been proud of your town.\"
　　\"i confess, i don\"t see what there is to be proud of if you\"ll only come to
　　oxford, margaret, i will show you a place to glory in.\"
　　\"well!\" said mr. hale, \"mr. thornton is coming to drink tea with us tonight,and he is as proud of milton as you of oxford. you two must tryand make each other a little more liberal-minded.\"
　　\"i don\"t want to be more liberal-minded, thank you,\" said mr. bell.
　　\"is mr. thornton coming to tea, papa?\" asked margaret in a low voice.
　　\"either to tea or soon after. he could not tell. he told us not to wait.\"
　　mr. thornton had determined that he would make no inquiry of hismother as to how far she had put her project into execution of speakingto margaret about the impropriety of her conduct. he felt pretty surethat, if this interview took place, his mother\"s account of what passed atit would only annoy and chagrin him, though he would all the time beaware of the colouring which it received by passing through her mind.
　　he shrank from hearing margaret\"s very name mentioned; he, while heblamed her--while he was jealous of her--while he renounced her--heloved her sorely, in spite of himself. he dreamt of her; he dreamt shecame dancing towards him with outspread arms, and with a lightnessand gaiety which made him loathe her, even while it allured him. butthe impression of this figure of margaret--with all margaret\"s charactertaken out of it, as completely as if some evil spirit had got possession ofher form--was so deeply stamped upon his imagination, that when hewakened he felt hardly able to separate the una from the duessa; andthe dislike he had to the latter seemed to envelope and disfigure theformer yet he was too proud to acknowledge his weakness by avoidingthe sight of her. he would neither seek an opportunity of being in hercompany nor avoid it. to convince himself of his power of self-control,he lingered over every piece of business this afternoon; he forced everymovement into unnatural slowness and deliberation; and it wasconsequently past eight o\"clock before he reached mr. hale\"s. thenthere were business arrangements to be transacted in the study with mr.
　　bell; and the latter kept on, sitting over the fire, and talking wearily,long after all business was transacted, and when they might just as wellhave gone upstairs. but mr. thornton would not say a word aboutmoving their quarters; he chafed and chafed, and thought mr. bell amost prosy companion; while mr. bell returned the compliment insecret, by considering mr. thornton about as brusque and curt a fellowas he had ever met with, and terribly gone off both in intelligence andmanner. at last, some slight noise in the room above suggested thedesirableness of moving there. they found margaret with a letter openbefore her, eagerly discussing its contents with her father. on theentrance of the gentlemen, it was immediately put aside; but mr.
　　thornton\"s eager senses caught some few words of mr. hale\"s to mr.
　　bell.
　　\"a letter from henry lennox. it makes margaret very hopeful.\"
　　mr. bell nodded. margaret was red as a rose when mr. thornton lookedat her. he had the greatest mind in the world to get up and go out of theroom that very instant, and never set foot in the house again.
　　\"we were thinking,\" said mr. hale, \"that you and mr. thornton had takenmargaret\"s advice, and were each trying to convert the other, you wereso long in the study.\"
　　\"and you thought there would be nothing left of us but an opinion, likethe kilkenny cat\"s tail. pray whose opinion did you think would havethe most obstinate vitality?\"
　　mr. thornton had not a notion what they were talking about, anddisdained to inquire. mr. hale politely enlightened him.
　　\"mr. thornton, we were accusing mr. bell this morning of a kind ofoxonian mediaeval bigotry against his native town; and we--margaret, ibelieve--suggested that it would do him good to associate a little withmilton manufacturers.\"




第136章 CHAPTER XV OUT OF TUNE (2)


　　\"i beg your pardon. margaret thought it would do the miltonmanufacturers good to associate a little more with oxford men. nowwasn\"t it so, margaret?\"
　　\"i believe i thought it would do both good to see a little more of theother,--i did not know it was my idea any more than papa\"s.\"
　　\"and so you see, mr. thornton, we ought to have been improving eachother down-stairs, instead of talking over vanished families of smithsand harrisons. however, i am willing to do my part now. i wonderwhen you milton men intend to live. all your lives seem to be spent ingathering together the materials for life.\"
　　\"by living, i suppose you mean enjoyment.\"
　　\"yes, enjoyment,--i don\"t specify of what, because i trust. we shouldboth consider mere pleasure as very poor enjoyment.\"
　　\"i would rather have the nature of the enjoyment defined.\"
　　\"well! enjoyment of leisure--enjoyment of the power and influencewhich money gives. you are all striving for money. what do you wantit for?\"
　　mr. thornton was silent. then he said, \"i really don\"t know. but moneyis not what i strive for.\"
　　\"what then?\"
　　\"it is a home question. i shall have to lay myself open to such acatechist, and i am not sure that i am prepared to do it.\"
　　\"no!\" said mr. hale; \"don\"t let us be personal in our catechism. you areneither of you representative men; you are each of you too individualfor that.\"
　　\"i am not sure whether to consider that as a compliment or not. i shouldlike to be the representative of oxford, with its beauty and its learning,
　　and its proud old history. what do you say, margaret; ought i to beflattered?\"
　　\"i don\"t know oxford. but there is a difference between being therepresentative of a city and the representative man of its inhabitants.\"
　　\"very true, miss margaret. now i remember, you were against me thismorning, and were quite miltonian and manufacturing in yourpreferences.\" margaret saw the quick glance of surprise that mr.
　　thornton gave her, and she was annoyed at the construction which hemight put on this speech of mr. bell\"s. mr. bell went on-\"
　　ah! i wish i could show you our high street--our radcliffe square. iam leaving out our colleges, just as i give mr. thornton leave to omithis factories in speaking of the charms of milton. i have a right to abusemy birth-place. remember i am a milton man.
　　mr. thornton was annoyed more than he ought to have been at all thatmr. bell was saying. he was not in a mood for joking. at another time,he could have enjoyed mr. bell\"s half testy condemnation of a townwhere the life was so at variance with every habit he had formed; butnow, he was galled enough to attempt to defend what was never meantto be seriously attacked.
　　\"i don\"t set up milton as a model of a town.\"
　　\"not in architecture?\" slyly asked mr. bell.
　　\"no! we\"ve been too busy to attend to mere outward appearances.\"
　　\"don\"t say mere outward appearances,\" said mr. hale, gently. \"theyimpress us all, from childhood upward--every day of our life.\"
　　\"wait a little while,\" said mr. thornton. \"remember, we are of adifferent race from the greeks, to whom beauty was everything, and towhom mr. bell might speak of a life of leisure and serene enjoyment,much of which entered in through their outward senses. i don\"t mean todespise them, any more than i would ape them. but i belong toteutonic blood; it is little mingled in this part of england to what it is inothers; we retain much of their language; we retain more of their spirit;we do not look upon life as a time for enjoyment, but as a time foraction and exertion. our glory and our beauty arise out of our inwardstrength, which makes us victorious over material resistance, and overgreater difficulties still. we are teutonic up here in darkshire inanother way. we hate to have laws made for us at a distance. we wishpeople would allow us to right ourselves, instead of continuallymeddling, with their imperfect legislation. we stand up for self-government, and oppose centralisation.\"
　　\"in short, you would like the heptarchy back again. well, at any rate, irevoke what i said this morning--that you milton people did notreverence the past. you are regular worshippers of thor.\"
　　\"if we do not reverence the past as you do in oxford, it is because we
　　want something which can apply to the present more directly. it is finewhen the study of the past leads to a prophecy of the future. but to mengroping in new circumstances, it would be finer if the words ofexperience could direct us how to act in what concerns us mostintimately and immediately; which is full of difficulties that must beencountered; and upon the mode in which they are met and conquered-notmerely pushed aside for the time--depends our future. out of thewisdom of the past, help us over the present. but no! people can speakof utopia much more easily than of the next day\"s duty; and yet whenthat duty is all done by others, who so ready to cry, \"fie, for shame!\"\"
　　\"and all this time i don\"t see what you are talking about. would youmilton men condescend to send up your to-day\"s difficulty to oxford?
　　you have not tried us yet.\"
　　mr. thornton laughed outright at this. \"i believe i was talking withreference to a good deal that has been troubling us of late; i wasthinking of the strikes we have gone through, which are troublesomeand injurious things enough, as i am finding to my cost. and yet thislast strike, under which i am smarting, has been respectable.\"
　　\"a respectable strike!\" said mr. bell. \"that sounds as if you were fargone in the worship of thor.\"
　　margaret felt, rather than saw, that mr. thornton was chagrined by therepeated turning into jest of what he was feeling as very serious. shetried to change the conversation from a subject about which one partycared little, while, to the other, it was deeply, because personally,interesting. she forced herself to say something.
　　\"edith says she finds the printed calicoes in corfu better and cheaperthan in london.\"
　　\"does she?\" said her father. \"i think that must be one of edith\"sexaggerations. are you sure of it, margaret?\"
　　\"i am sure she says so, papa.\"
　　\"then i am sure of the fact,\" said mr. bell. \"margaret, i go so far in myidea of your truthfulness, that it shall cover your cousin\"s character. idon\"t believe a cousin of yours could exaggerate.\"
wＷw。xiabｏok.com下 & 书 & 网



第137章 CHAPTER XV OUT OF TUNE (3)


　　\"is miss hale so remarkable for truth?\" said mr. thornton, bitterly. themoment he had done so, he could have bitten his tongue out. what washe? and why should he stab her with her shame in this way? how evilhe was to-night; possessed by ill-humour at being detained so long fromher; irritated by the mention of some name, because he thought itbelonged to a more successful lover; now ill-tempered because he hadbeen unable to cope, with a light heart, against one who was trying, bygay and careless speeches, to make the evening pass pleasantly away,-thekind old friend to all parties, whose manner by this time might bewell known to mr. thornton, who had been acquainted with him for
　　many years. and then to speak to margaret as he had done! she did notget up and leave the room, as she had done in former days, when hisabruptness or his temper had annoyed her. she sat quite still, after thefirst momentary glance of grieved surprise, that made her eyes look likesome child\"s who has met with an unexpected rebuff; they slowlydilated into mournful, reproachful sadness; and then they fell, and shebent over her work, and did not speak again. but he could not helplooking at her, and he saw a sigh tremble over her body, as if shequivered in some unwonted chill. he felt as the mother would havedone, in the midst of \"her rocking it, and rating it,\" had she been calledaway before her slow confiding smile, implying perfect trust in mother\"slove, had proved the renewing of its love. he gave short sharp answers;he was uneasy and cross, unable to discern between jest and earnest;anxious only for a look, a word of hers, before which to prostratehimself in penitent humility. but she neither looked nor spoke. herround taper fingers flew in and out of her sewing, as steadily andswiftly as if that were the business of her life. she could not care forhim, he thought, or else the passionate fervour of his wish would haveforced her to raise those eyes, if but for an instant, to read the laterepentance in his. he could have struck her before he left, in order thatby some strange overt act of rudeness, he might earn the privilege oftelling her the remorse that gnawed at his heart. it was well that the longwalk in the open air wound up this evening for him. it sobered him backinto grave resolution, that henceforth he would see as little of her aspossible,--since the very sight of that face arid form, the very sounds ofthat voice (like the soft winds of pure melody) had such power to movehim from his balance. well! he had known what love was--a sharppang, a fierce experience, in the midst of whose flames he wasstruggling! but, through that furnace he would fight his way out into theserenity of middle age,--all the richer and more human for havingknown this great passion.
　　when he had somewhat abruptly left the room, margaret rose from herseat, and began silently to fold up her work; the long seams wereheavy, and had an unusual weight for her languid arms. the round linesin her face took a lengthened, straighter form, and her whole appearancewas that of one who had gone through a day of great fatigue. as thethree prepared for bed, mr. bell muttered forth a little condemnation ofmr. thornton.
　　\"i never saw a fellow so spoiled by success. he can\"t bear a word; a jestof any kind. everything seems to touch on the soreness of his highdignity. formerly, he was as simple and noble as the open day; youcould not offend him, because he had no vanity.\"
　　\"he is not vain now,\" said margaret, turning round from the table, and
　　speaking with quiet distinctness. \"to-night he has not been like himselfsomething must have annoyed him before he came here.\"
　　mr. bell gave her one of his sharp glances from above his spectacles.
　　she stood it quite calmly; but, after she had left the room, he suddenlyasked,-\"
　　hale! did it ever strike you that thornton and your daughter have whatthe french call a tendresse for each other?\"
　　\"never!\" said mr. hale, first startled and then flurried by the new idea.
　　\"no, i am sure you are wrong. i am almost certain you are mistaken. ifthere is anything, it is all on mr. thornton\"s side. poor fellow! i hopeand trust he is not thinking of her, for i am sure she would not havehim.\"
　　\"well! i\"m a bachelor, and have steered clear of love affairs all my life;so perhaps my opinion is not worth having. or else i should say therewere very pretty symptoms about her!\"
　　\"then i am sure you are wrong,\" said mr. hale. \"he may care for her,though she really has been almost rude to him at times. but she!--why,margaret would never think of him, i\"m sure! such a thing has neverentered her head.\"
　　\"entering her heart would do. but i merely threw out a suggestion ofwhat might be. i dare say i was wrong. and whether i was wrong orright, i\"m very sleepy; so, having disturbed your night\"s rest (as i cansee) with my untimely fancies, i\"ll betake myself with an easy mind tomy own.\"
　　but mr. hale resolved that he would not be disturbed by any suchnonsensical idea; so he lay awake, determining not to think about it.
　　mr. bell took his leave the next day, bidding margaret look to him asone who had a right to help and protect her in all her troubles, ofwhatever nature they might be. to mr. hale he said,-\"
　　that margaret of yours has gone deep into my heart. take care of her,for she is a very precious creature,--a great deal too good for milton,-onlyfit for oxford, in fact. the town, i mean; not the men. i can\"t matchher yet. when i can, i shall bring my young man to stand side by sidewith your young woman, just as the genie in the arabian nightsbrought prince caralmazan to match with the fairy\"s princess badoura.\"
　　\"i beg you\"ll do no such thing. remember the misfortunes that ensued;and besides, i can\"t spare margaret.\"
　　\"no; on second thoughts, we\"ll have her to nurse us ten years hence,when we shall be two cross old invalids. seriously, hale! i wish you\"dleave milton; which is a most unsuitable place for you, though it wasmy recommendation in the first instance. if you would; i\"d swallow myshadows of doubts, and take a college living; and you and margaretshould come and live at the parsonage--you to be a sort of lay curate,
　　and take the unwashed off my hands; and she to be our housekeeper-thevillage lady bountiful--by day; and read us to sleep in the evenings.
　　i could be very happy in such a life. what do you think of it?\"
www.xiabook.com   www.ｌzuoＷen．Ｃom



第138章 CHAPTER XV OUT OF TUNE (4)


　　\"never!\" said mr. hale, decidedly. \"my one great change has been madeand my price of suffering paid. here i stay out my life; and here will ibe buried, and lost in the crowd.\"
　　\"i don\"t give up my plan yet. only i won\"t bait you with it any more justnow. where\"s the pearl? come, margaret, give me a farewell kiss; andremember, my dear, where you may find a true friend, as far as hiscapability goes. you are my child, margaret. remember that, and \"godbless you!\"
　　so they fell back into the monotony of the quiet life they wouldhenceforth lead. there was no invalid to hope and fear about; even thehigginses--so long a vivid interest--seemed to have receded from anyneed of immediate thought. the boucher children, left motherlessorphans, claimed what of margaret\"s care she could bestow; and shewent pretty often to see mary higgins, who had charge of them. thetwo families were living in one house: the elder children were athumble schools, the younger ones were tended, in mary\"s absence at herwork, by the kind neighbour whose good sense had struck margaret atthe time of boucher\"s death. of course she was paid for her trouble; andindeed, in all his little plans and arrangements for these orphan children,nicholas showed a sober judgment, and regulated method of thinking,which were at variance with his former more eccentric jerks of action.
　　he was so steady at his work, that margaret did not often see himduring these winter months; but when she did, she saw that he wincedaway from any reference to the father of those children, whom he hadso fully and heartily taken under his care. he did not speak easily of mr.
　　thornton.
　　\"to tell the truth,\" said he, \"he fairly bamboozles me. he\"s two chaps.
　　one chap i knowed of old as were measter all o\"er. t\"other chap hasn\"tan ounce of measter\"s flesh about him. how them two chaps is bound upin one body, is a craddy for me to find out. i\"ll not be beat by it, though.
　　meanwhile he comes here pretty often; that\"s how i know the chap that\"sa man, not a measter. and i reckon he\"s taken aback by me pretty muchas i am by him; for he sits and listens and stares, as if i were somestrange beast newly caught in some of the zones. but i\"m none daunted.
　　it would take a deal to daunt me in my own house, as he sees. and i tellhim some of my mind that i reckon he\"d ha\" been the better of hearingwhen he were a younger man.\"
　　\"and does he not answer you?\" asked mr. hale.
　　\"well! i\"ll not say th\" advantage is all on his side, for all i take credit forimproving him above a bit. sometimes he says a rough thing or two,
　　which is not agreeable to look at at first, but has a queer smack o\" truthin it when yo\" come to chew it. he\"ll be coming to-night, i reckon, aboutthem childer\"s schooling. he\"s not satisfied wi\" the make of it, and wantsfor t\" examine \"em.\"
　　\"what are they\"--began mr. hale; but margaret, touching his arm,showed him her watch.
　　\"it is nearly seven,\" she said. \"the evenings are getting longer now.
　　come, papa.\" she did not breathe freely till they were some distancefrom the house. then, as she became more calm, she wished that shehad not been in so great a hurry; for, somehow, they saw mr. thorntonbut very seldom now; and he might have come to see higgins, and forthe old friendship\"s sake she should like to have seen him to-night.
　　yes! he came very seldom, even for the dull cold purpose of lessons.
　　mr. hale was disappointed in his pupil\"s lukewarmness about greekliterature, which had but a short time ago so great an interest for him.
　　and now it often happened that a hurried note from mr. thorntonwould arrive, just at the last moment, saying that he was so muchengaged that he could not come to read with mr. hale that evening.
　　and though other pupils had taken more than his place as to time, noone was like his first scholar in mr. hale\"s heart. he was depressed andsad at this partial cessation of an intercourse which had become dear tohim; and he used to sit pondering over the reason that could haveoccasioned this change.
　　he startled margaret, one evening as she sate at her work, by suddenlyasking:
　　\"margaret! had you ever any reason for thinking that mr. thorntoncared for you?\"
　　he almost blushed as he put this question; but mr. bell\"s scouted idearecurred to him, and the words were out of his mouth before he wellknew what he was about.
　　margaret did not answer immediately; but by the bent drooping of herhead, he guessed what her reply would be.
　　\"yes; i believe--oh papa, i should have told you.\" and she dropped herwork, and hid her face in her hands.
下{书}网



第139章 CHAPTER XV OUT OF TUNE (5)


　　\"no, dear; don\"t think that i am impertinently curious. i am sure youwould have told me if you had felt that you could return his regard. didhe speak to you about it?\"
　　no answer at first; but by-and-by a little gentle reluctant \"yes.\"
　　\"and you refused him?\"
　　a long sigh; a more helpless, nerveless attitude, and another \"yes.\" butbefore her father could speak, margaret lifted up her face, rosy withsome beautiful shame, and, fixing her eyes upon him, said:
　　\"now, papa, i have told you this, and i cannot tell you more; and then
　　the whole thing is so painful to me; every word and action connectedwith it is so unspeakably bitter, that i cannot bear to think of it. oh,papa, i am sorry to have lost you this friend, but i could not help it--butoh! i am very sorry.\" she sate down on the ground, and laid her head onhis knees.
　　\"i too, am sorry, my dear. mr. bell quite startled me when he said, someidea of the kind--\"
　　\"mr. bell! oh, did mr. bell see it?\"
　　\"a little; but he took it into his head that you--how shall i say it?--thatyou were not ungraciously disposed towards mr. thornton. i knew thatcould never be. i hoped the whole thing was but an imagination; but iknew too well what your real feelings were to suppose that you couldever like mr. thornton in that way. but i am very sorry.\"
　　they were very quiet and still for some minutes. but, on stroking hercheek in a caressing way soon after, he was almost shocked to find herface wet with tears. as he touched her, she sprang up, and smiling withforced brightness, began to talk of the lennoxes with such a vehementdesire to turn the conversation, that mr. hale was too tender-hearted totry to force it back into the old channel.
　　\"to-morrow--yes, to-morrow they will be back in harley street. oh,how strange it will be! i wonder what room they will make into thenursery? aunt shaw will be happy with the baby. fancy edith amamma! and captain lennox--i wonder what he will do with himselfnow he has sold out!\"
　　\"i\"ll tell you what,\" said her father, anxious to indulge her in this freshsubject of interest, \"i think i must spare you for a fortnight just to run upto town and see the travellers. you could learn more, by half an hour\"sconversation with mr. henry lennox, about frederick\"s chances, than ina dozen of these letters of his; so it would, in fact, be uniting businesswith pleasure.\"
　　\"no, papa, you cannot spare me, and what\"s more, i won\"t be spared.\"
　　then after a pause, she added: \"i am losing hope sadly about frederick;he is letting us down gently, but i can see that mr. lennox himself hasno hope of hunting up the witnesses under years and years of time. no,\"
　　said she, \"that bubble was very pretty, and very dear to our hearts; but ithas burst like many another; and we must console ourselves with beingglad that frederick is so happy, and with being a great deal to eachother. so don\"t offend me by talking of being able to spare me, papa, fori assure you you can\"t.\"
　　but the idea of a change took root and germinated in margaret\"s heart,although not in the way in which her father proposed it at first. shebegan to consider how desirable something of the kind would be to herfather, whose spirits, always feeble, now became too frequently
　　depressed, and whose health, though he never complained, had beenseriously affected by his wife\"s illness and death. there were the regularhours of reading with his pupils, but that all giving and no receivingcould no longer be called companion-ship, as in the old days when mr.
　　thornton came to study under him. margaret was conscious of the wantunder which he was suffering, unknown to himself; the want of a man\"sintercourse with men. at helstone there had been perpetual occasionsfor an interchange of visits with neighbouring clergymen; and the poorlabourers in the fields, or leisurely tramping home at eve, or tendingtheir cattle in the forest, were always at liberty to speak or be spoken to.
　　but in milton every one was too busy for quiet speech, or any ripenedintercourse of thought; what they said was about business, very presentand actual; and when the tension of mind relating to their daily affairswas over, they sunk into fallow rest until next morning. the workmanwas not to be found after the day\"s work was done; he had gone away tosome lecture, or some club, or some beer-shop, according to his degreeof character. mr. hale thought of trying to deliver a course of lectures atsome of the institutions, but he contemplated doing this so much as aneffort of duty, and with so little of the genial impulse of love towardshis work and its end, that margaret was sure that it would not be welldone until he could look upon it with some kind of zest.
  #下!书! 网



第140章 CHAPTER XVI THE JOURNEY\"S END (1)


　　i see my way as birds their trackless way-i shall arrive! what time, what circuit first,i ask not: but unless god send his hailor blinding fire-balls, sleet, or stifling snow,in some time--his good time--i shall arrive;he guides me and the bird. in his good time!
　　browning\"s paracelsus.
　　so the winter was getting on, and the days were beginning to lengthen,without bringing with them any of the brightness of hope which usuallyaccompanies the rays of a february sun. mrs. thornton had of courseentirely ceased to come to the house. mr. thornton came occasionally,but his visits were addressed to her father, and were confined to thestudy. mr. hale spoke of him as always the same; indeed, the veryrarity of their intercourse seemed to make mr. hale set only the highervalue on it. and from what margaret could gather of what mr. thorntonhad said, there was nothing in the cessation of his visits which couldarise from any umbrage or vexation. his business affairs had becomecomplicated during the strike, and required closer attention than he hadgiven to them last winter. nay, margaret could even discover that hespoke from time to time of her, and always, as far as she could learn, inthe same calm friendly way, never avoiding and never seeking anymention of her name.
　　she was not in spirits to raise her father\"s tone of mind. the drearypeacefulness of the present time had been preceded by so long a periodof anxiety and care--even intermixed with storms--that her mind hadlost its elasticity. she tried to find herself occupation in teaching thetwo younger boucher children, and worked hard at goodness; hard, isay most truly, for her heart seemed dead to the end of all her efforts;and though she made them punctually and painfully, yet she stood as faroff as ever from any cheerfulness; her life seemed still bleak and dreary.
　　the only thing she did well, was what she did out of unconscious piety,the silent comforting and consoling of her father. not a mood of his butwhat found a ready sympathiser in margaret; not a wish of his that shedid not strive to forecast, and to fulfil. they were quiet wishes to besure, and hardly named without hesitation and apology. all the morecomplete and beautiful was her meek spirit of obedience. marchbrought the news of frederick\"s marriage. he and dolores wrote; she inspanish-english, as was but natural, and he with little turns andinversions of words which proved how far the idioms of his bride\"scountry were infecting him.
　　on the receipt of henry lennox\"s letter, announcing how little hopethere was of his ever clearing himself at a court-martial, in the absenceof the missing witnesses, frederick had written to margaret a prettyvehement letter, containing his renunciation of england as his country;he wished he could unnative himself, and declared that he would nottake his pardon if it were offered him, nor live in the country if he hadpermission to do so. all of which made margaret cry sorely, sounnatural did it seem to her at the first opening; but on consideration,she saw rather in such expression the poignancy of the disappointmentwhich had thus crushed his hopes; and she felt that there was nothing
　　for it but patience. in the next letter, frederick spoke so joyfully of thefuture that he had no thought for the past; and margaret found a use inherself for the patience she had been craving for him. she would haveto be patient. but the pretty, timid, girlish letters of dolores werebeginning to have a charm for both margaret and her father. the youngspaniard was so evidently anxious to make a favourable impressionupon her lover\"s english relations, that her feminine care peeped out atevery erasure; and the letters announcing the marriage, wereaccompanied by a splendid black lace mantilla, chosen by doloresherself for her unseen sister-in-law, whom frederick had represented asa paragon of beauty, wisdom and virtue. frederick\"s worldly positionwas raised by this marriage on to as high a level as they could desire.
　　barbour and co. was one of the most extensive spanish houses, andinto it he was received as a junior partner. margaret smiled a little, andthen sighed as she remembered afresh her old tirades against trade. herewas her preux chevalier of a brother turned merchant, trader! but thenshe rebelled against herself, and protested silently against the confusionimplied between a spanish merchant and a milton mill-owner. well!
　　trade or no trade, frederick was very, very happy. dolores must becharming, and the mantilla was exquisite! and then she returned to thepresent life.
　　her father had occasionally experienced a difficulty in breathing thisspring, which had for the time distressed him exceedingly. margaretwas less alarmed, as this difficulty went off completely in the intervals;but she still was so desirous of his shaking off the liability altogether, asto make her very urgent that he should accept mr. bell\"s invitation tovisit him at oxford this april. mr. bell\"s invitation included margaret.
　　nay more, he wrote a special letter commanding her to come; but shefelt as if it would be a greater relief to her to remain quietly at home,entirely free from any responsibility whatever, and so to rest her mindand heart in a manner which she had not been able to do for more thantwo years past.
www.56ｗen．ＣＯＭ/



第141章 CHAPTER XVI THE JOURNEY\"S END (2)


　　when her father had driven off on his way to the railroad, margaret felthow great and long had been the pressure on her time and her spirits. itwas astonishing, almost stunning, to feel herself so much at liberty; noone depending on her for cheering care, if not for positive happiness; noinvalid to plan and think for; she might be idle, and silent, and forgetful,-and what seemed worth more than all the other privileges--she mightbe unhappy if she liked. for months past, all her own personal cares andtroubles had had to be stuffed away into a dark cupboard; but now shehad leisure to take them out, and mourn over them, and study theirnature, and seek the true method of subduing them into the elements ofpeace. all these weeks she had been conscious of their existence in a
　　dull kind of way, though they were hidden out of sight. now, once forall she would consider them, and appoint to each of them its right workin her life. so she sat almost motionless for hours in the drawing-room,going over the bitterness of every remembrance with an unwincingresolution. only once she cried aloud, at the stinging thought of thefaithlessness which gave birth to that abasing falsehood.
　　she now would not even acknowledge the force of the temptation; herplans for frederick had all failed, and the temptation lay there a deadmockery,--a mockery which had never had life in it; the lie had been sodespicably foolish, seen by the light of the ensuing events, and faith inthe power of truth so infinitely the greater wisdom!
　　in her nervous agitation, she unconsciously opened a book of herfather\"s that lay upon the table,--the words that caught her eye in it,seemed almost made for her present state of acute self-abasement:-\"
　　je ne voudrois pas reprendre mon coeur en ceste sorte: meurs de honte,aveugle, impudent, traistre et desloyal a ton dieu, et sembables choses;mais je voudrois le corriger par voye de compassion. or sus, monpauvre coeur, nous voila tombez dans la fosse, laquelle nous avions tantresolu d\" eschapper. ah! relevons-nous, et quittons-la pour jamais,reclamons la misericorde de dieu, et esperons en elle qu\"elle nousassistera pour desormais estre plus fermes; et remettons-nous au cheminde l\"humilite. courage, soyons meshuy sur nos gardes, dieu nousaydera.\"
　　\"the way of humility. ah,\" thought margaret, \"that is what i havemissed! but courage, little heart. we will turn back, and by god\"s helpwe may find the lost path.\"
　　so she rose up, and determined at once to set to on some work whichshould take her out of herself. to begin with, she called in martha, asshe passed the drawing-room door in going up-stairs, and tried to findout what was below the grave, respectful, servant-like manner, whichcrusted over her individual character with an obedience that was almostmechanical. she found it difficult to induce martha to speak of any ofher personal interests; but at last she touched the right chord, in namingmrs. thornton. martha\"s whole face brightened, and, on a littleencouragement, out came a long story, of how her father had been inearly life connected with mrs. thornton\"s husband--nay, had even beenin a position to show him some kindness; what, martha hardly knew,for it had happened when she was quite a little child; and circumstanceshad intervened to separate the two families until martha was nearlygrown up, when, her father having sunk lower and lower from hisoriginal occupation as clerk in a warehouse, and her mother being dead,she and her sister, to use martha\"s own expression, would have been\"lost\" but for mrs. thornton; who sought them out, and thought for them,
　　and cared for them.
　　\"i had had the fever, and was but delicate; and mrs. thornton, and mr.
　　thornton too, they never rested till they had nursed me up in their ownhouse, and sent me to the sea and all. the doctors said the fever wascatching, but they cared none for that--only miss fanny, and she went a-visiting these folk that she is going to marry into. so, though she wasafraid at the time, it has all ended well.\"
　　\"miss fanny going to be married!\" exclaimed margaret.
　　\"yes; and to a rich gentleman, too, only he\"s a deal older than she is. hisname is watson; and his milk are somewhere out beyond hayleigh; it\"sa very good marriage, for all he\"s got such gray hair.\"
　　at this piece of information, margaret was silent long enough formartha to recover her propriety, and, with it, her habitual shortness ofanswer. she swept up the hearth, asked at what time she should preparetea, and quitted the room with the same wooden face with which shehad entered it. margaret had to pull herself up from indulging a badtrick, which she had lately fallen into, of trying to imagine how everyevent that she heard of in relation to mr. thornton would affect him:
　　whether he would like it or dislike it.
　　the next day she had the little boucher children for their lessons, andtook a long walk, and ended by a visit to mary higgins. somewhat tomargaret\"s surprise, she found nicholas already come home from hiswork; the lengthening light had deceived her as to the lateness of theevening. he too seemed, by his manners, to have entered a little moreon the way of humility; he was quieter, and less self-asserting.
　　\"so th\" oud gentleman\"s away on his travels, is he?\" said he. \"little \"unstelled me so. eh! but they\"re sharp \"uns, they are; i a\"most think theybeat my own wenches for sharpness, though mappen it\"s wrong to sayso, and one on \"em in her grave. there\"s summut in th\" weather, ireckon, as sets folk a-wandering. my measter, him at th\" shop yonder, isspinning about th\" world somewhere.\"
　　\"is that the reason you\"re so soon at home to-night?\" asked margaretinnocently.
　　\"thou know\"st nought about it, that\"s all,\" said he, contemptuously. \"i\"mnot one wi\" two faces--one for my measter, and t\"other for his back. icounted a\" th\" clocks in the town striking afore i\"d leave my work. no!
　　yon thornton\"s good enough for to fight wi\", but too good for to becheated. it were you as getten me the place, and i thank yo\" for it.
　　thornton\"s is not a bad mill, as times go. stand down, lad, and say yo\"rpretty hymn to miss margaret. that\"s right; steady on thy legs, and rightarm out as straight as a shewer. one to stop, two to stay, three mak\"
　　ready, and four away!\"




第142章 CHAPTER XVI THE JOURNEY\"S END (3)


　　the little fellow repeated a methodist hymn, far above his
　　comprehension in point of language, but of which the swinging rhythmhad caught his ear, and which he repeated with all the developedcadence of a member of parliament. when margaret had dulyapplauded, nicholas called for another, and yet another, much to hersurprise, as she found him thus oddly and unconsciously led to take aninterest in the sacred things which he had formerly scouted.
　　it was past the usual tea-time when she reached home; but she had thecomfort of feeling that no one had been kept waiting for her; and ofthinking her own thoughts while she rested, instead of anxiouslywatching another person to learn whether to be grave or gay. after teashe resolved to examine a large packet of letters, and pick out those thatwere to be destroyed.
　　among them she came to four or five of mr. henry lennox\"s, relatingto frederick\"s affairs; and she carefully read them over again, with thesole intention, when she began, to ascertain exactly on how fine achance the justification of her brother hung. but when she had finishedthe last, and weighed the pros and cons, the little personal revelation ofcharacter contained in them forced itself on her notice. it was evidentenough, from the stiffness of the wording, that mr. lennox had neverforgotten his relation to her in any interest he might feel in the subjectof the correspondence. they were clever letters; margaret saw that in atwinkling; but she missed out of them all hearty and genial atmosphere.
　　they were to be preserved, however, as valuable; so she laid themcarefully on one side. when this little piece of business was ended, shefell into a reverie; and the thought of her absent father ran strangely inmargaret\"s head this night. she almost blamed herself for having felt hersolitude (and consequently his absence) as a relief; but these two dayshad set her up afresh, with new strength and brighter hope. plans whichhad lately appeared to her in the guise of tasks, now appeared likepleasures. the morbid scales had fallen from her eyes, and she saw herposition and her work more truly. if only mr. thornton would restoreher the lost friendship,--nay, if he would only come from time to time tocheer her father as in former days,--though she should never see him,she felt as if the course of her future life, though not brilliant inprospect, might lie clear and even before her. she sighed as she rose upto go to bed. in spite of the \"one step\"s enough for me,\"--in spite of theone plain duty of devotion to her father,--there lay at her heart ananxiety and a pang of sorrow.
　　and mr. hale thought of margaret, that april evening, just as strangelyand as persistently as she was thinking of him. he had been fatigued bygoing about among his old friends and old familiar places. he had hadexaggerated ideas of the change which his altered opinions might makein his friends\" reception of him; but although some of them might have
　　felt shocked or grieved or indignant at his falling off in the abstract, assoon as they saw the face of the man whom they had once loved, theyforgot his opinions in himself; or only remembered them enough to givean additional tender gravity to their manner. for mr. hale had not beenknown to many; he had belonged to one of the smaller colleges, and hadalways been shy and reserved; but those who in youth had cared topenetrate to the delicacy of thought and feeling that lay below hissilence and indecision, took him to their hearts, with something of theprotecting kindness which they would have shown to a woman. and therenewal of this kindliness, after the lapse of years, and an interval of somuch change, overpowered him more than any roughness or expressionof disapproval could have done.
　　\"i\"m afraid we\"ve done too much,\" said mr. bell. \"you\"re suffering nowfrom having lived so long in that milton air.
　　\"i am tired,\" said mr. hale. \"but it is not milton air. i\"m fifty-five yearsof age, and that little fact of itself accounts for any loss of strength.\"
　　\"nonsense! i\"m upwards of sixty, and feel no loss of strength, eitherbodily or mental. don\"t let me hear you talking so. fifty-five! why,you\"re quite a young man.\"
　　mr. hale shook his head. \"these last few years!\" said he. but after aminute\"s pause, he raised himself from his half recumbent position, inone of mr. bell\"s luxurious easy-chairs, and said with a kind oftrembling earnestness:
　　\"bell! you\"re not to think, that if i could have foreseen all that wouldcome of my change of opinion, and my resignation of my living--no!
　　not even if i could have known how she would have suffered,--that iwould undo it--the act of open acknowledgment that i no longer heldthe same faith as the church in which i was a priest. as i think now,even if i could have foreseen that cruellest martyrdom of suffering,through the sufferings of one whom i loved, i would have done just thesame as far as that step of openly leaving the church went. i might havedone differently, and acted more wisely, in all that i subsequently didfor my family. but i don\"t think god endued me with over-muchwisdom or strength,\" he added, falling hack into his old position.
　　mr. bell blew his nose ostentatiously before answering. then he said:
　　\"he gave you strength to do what your conscience told you was right;and i don\"t see that we need any higher or holier strength than that; orwisdom either. i know i have not that much; and yet men set me downin their fool\"s books as a wise man; an independent character; strong-minded, and all that cant. the veriest idiot who obeys his own simplelaw of right, if it be but in wiping his shoes on a door-mat, is wiser andstronger than i. but what gulls men are!\"
　　there was a pause. mr. hale spoke first, in continuation of his thought:
　　\"about margaret.\"
　　\"well! about margaret. what then?\"
　　\"if i die----\"
　　\"nonsense!\"
　　\"what will become of her--i often think? i suppose the lennoxes willask her to live with them. i try to think they will. her aunt shaw lovedher well in her own quiet way; but she forgets to love the absent.\"
　　\"a very common fault. what sort of people are the lennoxes?\"
　　\"he, handsome, fluent, and agreeable. edith, a sweet little spoiledbeauty. margaret loves her with all her heart, and edith with as much ofher heart as she can spare.\"




第143章 CHAPTER XVI THE JOURNEY\"S END (4)


　　\"now, hale; you know that girl of yours has got pretty nearly all myheart. i told you that before. of course, as your daughter, as my goddaughter,i took great interest in her before i saw her the last time. butthis visit that i paid to you at milton made me her slave. i went, awilling old victim, following the car of the conqueror. for, indeed, shelooks as grand and serene as one who has struggled, and may bestruggling, and yet has the victory secure in sight. yes, in spite of allher present anxieties, that was the look on her face. and so, all i have isat her service, if she needs it; and will be hers, whether she will or no,when i die. moreover, i myself, will be her preux chevalier, sixty andgouty though i be. seriously, old friend, your daughter shall be myprincipal charge in life, and all the help that either my wit or mywisdom or my willing heart can give, shall be hers. i don\"t choose herout as a subject for fretting. something, i know of old, you must have toworry yourself about, or you wouldn\"t be happy. but you\"re going tooutlive me by many a long year. you spare, thin men are alwaystempting and always cheating death! it\"s the stout, florid fellows likeme, that always go off first.\"
　　if mr. bell had had a prophetic eye he might have seen the torch all butinverted, and the angel with the grave and composed face standing verynigh, beckoning to his friend. that night mr. hale laid his head downon the pillow on which it never more should stir with life. the servantwho entered his room in the morning, received no answer to his speech;drew near the bed, and saw the calm, beautiful face lying white and coldunder the ineffaceable seal of death. the attitude was exquisitely easy;there had been no pain--no struggle. the action of the heart must haveceased as he lay down.
　　mr. bell was stunned by the shock; and only recovered when the timecame for being angry at every suggestion of his man\"s.
　　\"a coroner\"s inquest? pooh. you don\"t think i poisoned him! dr. forbessays it is just the natural end of a heart complaint. poor old hale! youwore out that tender heart of yours before its time. poor old friend! how
　　he talked of his---- wallis, pack up a carpet-bag for me in five minutes.
　　here have i been talking. pack it up, i say. i must go to milton by thenext train.\"
　　the bag was packed, the cab ordered, the railway reached, in twentyminutes from the moment of this decision. the london train whizzedby, drew back some yards, and in mr. bell was hurried by the impatientguard. he threw himself back in his seat, to try, with closed eyes, tounderstand how one in life yesterday could be dead to-day; and shortlytears stole out between his grizzled eye-lashes, at the feeling of whichhe opened his keen eyes, and looked as severely cheerful as his setdetermination could make him. he was not going to blubber before aset of strangers. not he!
　　there was no set of strangers, only one sitting far from him on the sameside. by and bye mr. bell peered at him, to discover what manner ofman it was that might have been observing his emotion; and behind thegreat sheet of the outspread \"times,\" he recognised mr. thornton.
　　\"why, thornton! is that you?\" said he, removing hastily to a closerproximity. he shook mr. thornton vehemently by the hand, until thegripe ended in a sudden relaxation, for the hand was wanted to wipeaway tears. he had last seen mr. thornton in his friend hale\"s company.
　　\"i\"m going to milton, bound on a melancholy errand. going to break tohale\"s daughter the news of his sudden death!\"
　　\"death! mr. hale dead!\"




第144章 CHAPTER XVI THE JOURNEY\"S END (5)


　　\"ay; i keep saying it to myself, \"hale is dead!\" but it doesn\"t make it anythe more real. hale is dead for all that. he went to bed well, to allappearance, last night, and was quite cold this morning when myservant went to call him.\"
　　\"where? i don\"t understand!\"
　　\"at oxford. he came to stay with me; hadn\"t been in oxford thisseventeen years--and this is the end of it.\"
　　not one word was spoken for above a quarter of an hour. then mr.
　　thornton said:
　　\"and she!\" and stopped full short.
　　\"margaret you mean. yes! i am going to tell her. poor fellow! how fullhis thoughts were of her all last night! good god! last night only. andhow immeasurably distant he is now! but i take margaret as my childfor his sake. i said last night i would take her for her own sake. well, itake her for both.\"
　　mr. thornton made one or two fruitless attempts to speak, before hecould get out the words:
　　\"what will become of her!\"
　　\"i rather fancy there will be two people waiting for her: myself for one. iwould take a live dragon into my house to live, if, by hiring such a
　　chaperon, and setting up an establishment of my own, i could make myold age happy with having margaret for a daughter. but there are thoselennoxes!\"
　　\"who are they?\" asked mr. thornton with trembling interest.
　　\"oh, smart london people, who very likely will think they\"ve the bestright to her. captain lennox married her cousin--the girl she wasbrought up with. good enough people, i dare say. and there\"s her aunt,mrs. shaw. there might be a way open, perhaps, by my offering tomarry that worthy lady! but that would be quite a pis aller. and thenthere\"s that brother!\"
　　\"what brother? a brother of her aunt\"s?\"
　　\"no, no; a clever lennox, (the captain\"s a fool, you must understand) ayoung barrister, who will be setting his cap at margaret. i know he hashad her in his mind this five years or more: one of his chums told me asmuch; and he was only kept back by her want of fortune. now that willbe done away with.\"
　　\"how?\" asked mr. thornton, too earnestly curious to be aware of theimpertinence of his question.
　　\"why, she\"ll have my money at my death. and if this henry lennox ishalf good enough for her, and she likes him--well! i might find anotherway of getting a home through a marriage. i\"m dreadfully afraid ofbeing tempted, at an unguarded moment, by the aunt.\"
　　neither mr. bell nor mr. thornton was in a laughing humour; so theoddity of any of the speeches which the former made was unnoticed bythem. mr. bell whistled, without emitting any sound beyond a longhissing breath; changed his seat, without finding comfort or rest whilemr. thornton sat immoveably still, his eyes fixed on one spot in thenewspaper, which he had taken up in order to give himself leisure tothink.
　　\"where have you been?\" asked mr. bell, at length.
　　\"to havre. trying to detect the secret of the great rise in the price ofcotton.\"
　　\"ugh! cotton, and speculations, and smoke, well-cleansed and well-cared-for machinery, and unwashed and neglected hands. poor oldhale! poor old hale! if you could have known the change which it wasto him from helstone. do you know the new forest at all?\"
　　\"yes.\" (very shortly).
　　\"then you can fancy the difference between it and milton. what partwere you in? were you ever at helstone? a little picturesque village,like some in the odenwald? you know helstone?\"
　　\"i have seen it. it was a great change to leave it and come to milton.\"
　　he took up his newspaper with a determined air, as if resolved to avoidfurther conversation; and mr. bell was fain to resort to his former
　　occupation of trying to find out how he could best break the news tomargaret.
　　she was at an up-stairs window; she saw him alight; she guessed thetruth with an instinctive flash. she stood in the middle of the drawing-room, as if arrested in her first impulse to rush downstairs, and as if bythe same restraining thought she had been turned to stone; so white andimmoveable was she.
　　\"oh! don\"t tell me! i know it from your face! you would have sent--youwould not have left him--if he were alive! oh papa, papa!\"
www.xiabook.com



第145章 CHAPTER XVII ALONE! ALONE! (1)


　　\"when some beloved voice that was to youboth sound and sweetness, faileth suddenly,and silence, against which you dare not cry,aches round you like a strong disease and new-what hope? what help? what music will undothat silence to your sense?\"
　　mrs. browning.
　　the shock had been great. margaret fell into a state of prostration,which did not show itself in sobs and tears, or even find the relief ofwords. she lay on the sofa, with her eyes shut, never speaking but whenspoken to, and then replying in whispers. mr. bell was perplexed. hedared not leave her; he dared not ask her to accompany him back tooxford, which had been one of the plans he had formed on the journeyto milton, her physical exhaustion was evidently too complete for her toundertake any such fatigue--putting the sight that she would have toencounter out of the question. mr. bell sate over the fire, consideringwhat he had better do. margaret lay motionless, and almost breathlessby him. he would not leave her, even for the dinner which dixon had
　　prepared for him down-stairs, and, with sobbing hospitality, would fainhave tempted him to eat. he had a plateful of something brought up tohim. in general, he was particular and dainty enough, and knew welleach shade of flavour in his food, but now the devilled chicken tastedlike sawdust. he minced up some of the fowl for margaret, andpeppered and salted it well; but when dixon, following his directions,tried to feed her, the languid shake of head proved that in such a state asmargaret was in, food would only choke, not nourish her.
　　mr. bell gave a great sigh; lifted up his stout old limbs (stiff withtravelling) from their easy position, and followed dixon out of theroom.
　　\"i can\"t leave her. i must write to them at oxford, to see that thepreparations are made: they can he getting on with these till i arrive.
　　can\"t mrs. lennox come to her? i\"ll write and tell her she must. the girlmust have some woman-friend about her, if only to talk her into a goodfit of crying.\"
　　dixon was crying--enough for two; but, after wiping her eyes andsteadying her voice, she managed to tell mr. bell, that mrs. lennox wastoo near her confinement to be able to undertake any journey at present.
　　\"well! i suppose we must have mrs. shaw; she\"s come back to england,isn\"t she?\"
　　\"yes, sir, she\"s come back; but i don\"t think she will like to leave mrs.
　　lennox at such an interesting time,\" said dixon, who did not muchapprove of a stranger entering the household, to share with her in herruling care of margaret.
　　\"interesting time be--\" mr. bell restricted himself to coughing over theend of his sentence. \"she could be content to he at venice or naples, orsome of those popish places, at the last \"interesting time,\" which tookplace in corfu, i think. and what does that little prosperous woman\"s\"interesting time\" signify, in comparison with that poor creature there,-thathelpless, homeless, friendless margaret--lying as still on that sofaas if it were an altar-tomb, and she the stone statue on it. i tell you, mrs.
　　shaw shall come. see that a room, or whatever she wants, is got readyfor her by to-morrow night. i\"ll take care she comes.\"
　　accordingly mr. bell wrote a letter, which mrs. shaw declared, withmany tears, to he so like one of the dear general\"s when he was going tohave a fit of the gout, that she should always value and preserve it. if hehad given her the option, by requesting or urging her, as if a refusalwere possible, she might not have come--true and sincere as was hersympathy with margaret. it needed the sharp uncourteous command tomake her conquer her vis inertiae, and allow herself to be packed by hermaid, after the latter had completed the boxes. edith, all cap, shawls,and tears, came out to the top of the stairs, as captain lennox was
　　taking her mother down to the carriage:
　　\"don\"t forget, mamma; margaret must come and live with us. sholtowill go to oxford on wednesday, and you must send word by mr. bellto him when we\"re to expect you. and if you want sholto, he can go onfrom oxford to milton. don\"t forget, mamma; you are to bring backmargaret.\"
　　edith re-entered the drawing-room. mr. henry lennox was there,cutting open the pages of a new review. without lifting his head, hesaid, \"if you don\"t like sholto to be so long absent from you, edith, ihope you will let me go down to milton, and give what assistance i can.\"
　　\"oh, thank you,\" said edith, \"i dare say old mr. bell will do everythinghe can, and more help may not be needed. only one does not look formuch savoir-faire from a resident fellow. dear, darling margaret! won\"tit be nice to have her here, again? you were both great allies, yearsago.\"
　　\"were we?\" asked he indifferently, with an appearance of beinginterested in a passage in the review.
　　\"well, perhaps not--i forget. i was so full of sholto. but doesn\"t it fallout well, that if my uncle was to die, it should be just now, when we arecome home, and settled in the old house, and quite ready to receivemargaret? poor thing! what a change it will be to her from milton! i\"llhave new chintz for her bedroom, and make it look new and bright, andcheer her up a little.\"
　　in the same spirit of kindness, mrs. shaw journeyed to milton,occasionally dreading the first meeting, and wondering how it would begot over; but more frequently planning how soon she could getmargaret away from \"that horrid place,\" and back into the pleasantcomforts of harley street.
　　\"oh dear!\" she said to her maid; \"look at those chimneys! my poor sisterhale! i don\"t think i could have rested at naples, if i had known what itwas! i must have come and fetched her and margaret away.\" and toherself she acknowledged, that she had always thought her brother-inlawrather a weak man, but never so weak as now, when she saw forwhat a place he had exchanged the lovely helstone home.
  www.7wenxue.com



第146章 CHAPTER XVII ALONE! ALONE! (2)


　　margaret had remained in the same state; white, motionless, speechless,tearless. they had told her that her aunt shaw was coming; but she hadnot expressed either surprise or pleasure, or dislike to the idea. mr. bell,whose appetite had returned, and who appreciated dixon\"s endeavoursto gratify it, in vain urged upon her to taste some sweetbreads stewedwith oysters; she shook her head with the same quiet obstinacy as onthe previous day; and he was obliged to console himself for herrejection, by eating them all himself but margaret was the first to hearthe stopping of the cab that brought her aunt from the railway station.
　　her eyelids quivered, her lips coloured and trembled. mr. bell wentdown to meet mrs. shaw; and when they came up, margaret wasstanding, trying to steady her dizzy self; and when she saw her aunt, shewent forward to the arms open to receive her, and first found thepassionate relief of tears on her aunt\"s shoulder. all thoughts of quiethabitual love, of tenderness for years, of relationship to the dead,--allthat inexplicable likeness in look, tone, and gesture, that seem to belongto one family, and which reminded margaret so forcibly at this momentof her mother,--came in to melt and soften her numbed heart into theoverflow of warm tears.
　　mr. bell stole out of the room, and went down into the study, where heordered a fire, and tried to divert his thoughts by taking down andexamining the different books. each volume brought a remembrance ora suggestion of his dead friend. it might be a change of employmentfrom his two days\" work of watching margaret, but it was no change ofthought. he was glad to catch the sound of mr. thornton\"s voice,making enquiry at the door. dixon was rather cavalierly dismissinghim; for with the appearance of mrs. shaw\"s maid, came visions offormer grandeur, of the beresford blood, of the \"station\" (so she waspleased to term it) from which her young lady had been ousted, and towhich she was now, please god, to be restored. these visions, whichshe had been dwelling on with complacency in her conversation withmrs. shaw\"s maid (skilfully eliciting meanwhile all the circumstances ofstate and consequence connected with the harley street establishment,for the edification of the listening martha), made dixon rather inclinedto be supercilious in her treatment of any inhabitant of milton; so,though she always stood rather in awe of mr. thornton, she was as curtas she durst be in telling him that he could see none of the inmates ofthe house that night. it was rather uncomfortable to he contradicted inher statement by mr. bell\"s opening the study-door, and calling out:
　　\"thornton! is that you? come in for a minute or two; i want to speak toyou.\" so mr. thornton went into the study, and dixon had to retreat intothe kitchen, and reinstate herself in her own esteem by a prodigiousstory of sir john beresford\"s coach and six, when he was high sheriff.
　　\"i don\"t know what i wanted to say to you after all. only it\"s dull enoughto sit in a room where everything speaks to you of a dead friend. yetmargaret and her aunt must have the drawing-room to themselves!\"
　　\"is mrs.--is her aunt come?\" asked mr. thornton.
　　\"come? yes! maid and all. one would have thought she might havecome by herself at such a time! and now i shall have to turn out andfind my way to the clarendon.\"
　　\"you must not go to the clarendon. we have five or six empty bedroomsat home.\"
　　\"well aired?\"
　　\"i think you may trust my mother for that.\"
　　\"then i\"ll only run up-stairs and wish that wan girl good-night, andmake my bow to her aunt, and go off with you straight.\"
　　mr. bell was some time up-stairs. mr. thornton began to think it long,for he was full of business, and had hardly been able to spare the timefor running up to crampton, and enquiring how miss hale was.
　　when they had set out upon their walk, mr. bell said:
　　\"i was kept by those women in the drawing-room. mrs. shaw is anxiousto get home--on account of her daughter, she says--and wants margaretto go off with her at once. now she is no more fit for travelling than iam for flying. besides, she says, and very justly, that she has friends shemust see--that she must wish good-bye to several people; and then heraunt worried her about old claims, and was she forgetful of old friends?
　　and she said, with a great burst of crying, she should be glad enough togo from a place where she had suffered so much. now i must return tooxford to-morrow, and i don\"t know on which side of the scale to throwin my voice.\"
　　he paused, as if asking a question; but he received no answer from hiscompanion, the echo of whose thoughts kept repeating-\"
　　where she had suffered so much.\" alas! and that was the way in whichthis eighteen months in milton--to him so unspeakably precious, downto its very bitterness, which was worth all the rest of life\"s sweetness-wouldbe remembered. neither loss of father, nor loss of mother, dearas she was to mr. thornton, could have poisoned the remembrance ofthe weeks, the days, the hours, when a walk of two miles, every step ofwhich was pleasant, as it brought him nearer and nearer to her, took himto her sweet presence--every step of which was rich, as each recurringmoment that bore him away from her made him recall some fresh gracein her demeanour, or pleasant pungency in her character. yes! whateverhad happened to him, external to his relation to her, he could never havespoken of that time, when he could have seen her every day--when hehad her within his grasp, as it were--as a time of suffering. it had been aroyal time of luxury to him, with all its stings and contumelies,compared to the poverty that crept round and clipped the anticipation ofthe future down to sordid fact, and life without an atmosphere of eitherhope or fear.
wwＷ．lzuｏwen.com



第147章 CHAPTER XVII ALONE! ALONE! (3)


　　mrs. thornton and fanny were in the dining-room; the latter in a flutterof small exultation, as the maid held up one glossy material afteranother, to try the effect of the wedding-dresses by candlelight. hermother really tried to sympathise with her, but could not. neither tastenor dress were in her line of subjects, and she heartily wished thatfanny had accepted her brother\"s offer of having the wedding clothes
　　provided by some first-rate london dressmaker, without the endlesstroublesome discussions, and unsettled wavering, that arose out offanny\"s desire to choose and superintend everything herself. mr.
　　thornton was only too glad to mark his grateful approbation of anysensible man, who could be captivated by fanny\"s second-rate airs andgraces, by giving her ample means for providing herself with the finery,which certainly rivalled, if it did not exceed, the lover in her estimation.
　　when her brother and mr. bell came in, fanny blushed and simpered,and fluttered over the signs of her employment, in a way which couldnot have failed to draw attention from any one else but mr. bell. if hethought about her and her silks and satins at all, it was to compare herand them with the pale sorrow he had left behind him, sittingmotionless, with bent head and folded hands, in a room where thestillness was so great that you might almost fancy the rush in yourstraining ears was occasioned by the spirits of the dead, yet hoveringround their beloved. for, when mr. bell had first gone up-stairs, mrs.
　　shaw lay asleep on the sofa; and no sound broke the silence.
　　mrs. thornton gave mr. bell her formal, hospitable welcome. she wasnever so gracious as when receiving her son\"s friends in her son\"shouse; and the more unexpected they were, the more honour to heradmirable housekeeping preparations for comfort.
　　\"how is miss hale?\" she asked.
　　\"about as broken down by this last stroke as she can be.\"
　　\"i am sure it is very well for her that she has such a friend as you.\"
　　\"i wish i were her only friend, madam. i daresay it sounds very brutal;but here have i been displaced, and turned out of my post of comforterand adviser by a fine lady aunt; and there are cousins and what notclaiming her in london, as if she were a lap-dog belonging to them.
　　and she is too weak and miserable to have a will of her own.\"
　　\"she must indeed be weak,\" said mrs. thornton, with an impliedmeaning which her son understood well. \"but where,\" continued mrs.
　　thornton, \"have these relations been all this time that miss hale hasappeared almost friendless, and has certainly had a good deal of anxietyto bear?\" but she did not feel interest enough in the answer to herquestion to wait for it. she left the room to make her householdarrangements.
　　\"they have been living abroad. they have some kind of claim upon her.
　　i will do them that justice. the aunt brought her up, and she and thecousin have been like sisters. the thing vexing me, you see, is that iwanted to take her for a child of my own; and i am jealous of thesepeople, who don\"t seem to value the privilege of their right. now itwould be different if frederick claimed her.\"
　　\"frederick!\" exclaimed mr. thornton. \"who is he? what right--?\" me
　　stopped short in his vehement question.
　　\"frederick,\" said mr. bell in surprise. \"why don\"t you know? he\"s herbrother. have you not heard--\"
　　\"i never heard his name before. where is he? who is he?\"
　　\"surely i told you about him, when the family first came to milton--theson who was concerned in that mutiny.\"
　　\"i never heard of him till this moment. where does he live?\"
　　\"in spain. he\"s liable to be arrested the moment he sets foot on englishground. poor fellow! he will grieve at not being able to attend hisfather\"s funeral. we must be content with captain lennox; for i don\"tknow of any other relation to summon.\"
　　\"i hope i may be allowed to go?\"
　　\"certainly; thankfully. you\"re a good fellow, after all, thornton. haleliked you. he spoke to me, only the other day, about you at oxford. heregretted he had seen so little of you lately. i am obliged to you forwishing to show him respect.\"
　　\"but about frederick. does he never come to england?\"
　　\"never.\"
　　\"he was not over here about the time of mrs. hale\"s death?\"
　　\"no. why, i was here then. i hadn\"t seen hale for years and years and, ifyou remember, i came-- no, it was some time after that that i came. butpoor frederick hale was not here then. what made you think he was?\"
　　\"i saw a young man walking with miss hale one day,\" replied mr.
　　thornton, \"and i think it was about that time.\"
　　\"oh, that would be this young lennox, the captain\"s brother. he\"s alawyer, and they were in pretty constant correspondence with him; and iremember mr. hale told me he thought he would come down. do youknow,\" said mr. bell, wheeling round, and shutting one eye, the better tobring the forces of the other to bear with keen scrutiny on mr.
　　thornton\"s face, \"that i once fancied you had a little tenderness formargaret?\"
　　no answer. no change of countenance.
　　\"and so did poor hale. not at first, and not till i had put it into his head.\"
　　\"i admired miss hale. every one must do so. she is a beautiful creature,\"
　　said mr. thornton, driven to bay by mr. bell\"s pertinacious questioning.
　　\"is that all! you can speak of her in that measured way, as simply abeautiful creature\"--only something to catch the eye. i did hope you hadhad nobleness enough in you to make you pay her the homage of theheart. though i believe--in fact i know, she would have rejected you,still to have loved her without return would have lifted you higher thanall those, be they who they may, that have never known her to love.
　　\"beautiful creature\" indeed! do you speak of her as you would of ahorse or a dog?\"
　　mr. thornton\"s eyes glowed like red embers.
   http://www.xiaboＯk.com



第148章 CHAPTER XVII ALONE! ALONE! (4)


　　\"mr. bell,\" said he, \"before you speak so, you should remember that allmen are not as free to express what they feel as you are. let us talk ofsomething else.\" for though his heart leaped up, as at a trumpet-call, toevery word that mr. bell had said, and though he knew that what he hadsaid would henceforward bind the thought of the old oxford fellowclosely up with the most precious things of his heart, yet he would notbe forced into any expression of what he felt towards margaret. he wasno mocking-bird of praise, to try because another extolled what hereverenced and passionately loved, to outdo him in laudation. so heturned to some of the dry matters of business that lay between mr. belland him, as landlord and tenant.
　　\"what is that heap of brick and mortar we came against in the yard? anyrepairs wanted?\"
　　\"no, none, thank you.\"
　　\"are you building on your own account? if you are, i\"m very muchobliged to you.\"
　　\"i\"m building a dining-room--for the men i mean--the hands.\"
　　\"i thought you were hard to please, if this room wasn\"t good enough tosatisfy you, a bachelor.\"
　　\"i\"ve got acquainted with a strange kind of chap, and i put one or twochildren in whom he is interested to school. so, as i happened to bepassing near his house one day, i just went there about some triflingpayment to be made; and i saw such a miserable black frizzle of adinner--a greasy cinder of meat, as first set me a-thinking. but it wasnot till provisions grew so high this winter that i bethought me how, bybuying things wholesale, and cooking a good quantity of provisionstogether, much money might be saved, and much comfort gained. so ispoke to my friend--or my enemy--the man i told you of--and he foundfault with every detail of my plan; and in consequence i laid it aside,both as impracticable, and also because if i forced it into operation ishould be interfering with the independence of my men; when,suddenly, this higgins came to me and graciously signified his approvalof a scheme so nearly the same as mine, that i might fairly have claimedit; and, moreover, the approval of several of his fellow-workmen, towhom he had spoken. i was a little \"riled,\" i confess, by his manner,and thought of throwing the whole thing overboard to sink or swim. butit seemed childish to relinquish a plan which i had once thought wiseand well-laid, just because i myself did not receive all the honour andconsequence due to the originator. so i coolly took the part assigned tome, which is something like that of steward to a club. i buy in theprovisions wholesale, and provide a fitting matron or cook.\"
　　\"i hope you give satisfaction in your new capacity. are you a good
　　judge of potatoes and onions? but i suppose mrs. thornton assists youin your marketing.\"
　　\"not a bit,\" replied mr. thornton. \"she disapproves of the whole plan,and now we never mention it to each other. but i manage pretty well,getting in great stocks from liverpool, and being served in butcher\"smeat by our own family butcher. i can assure you, the hot dinners thematron turns out are by no means to be despised.\"
　　\"do you taste each dish as it goes in, in virtue of your office? i hope youhave a white wand.\"
　　\"i was very scrupulous, at first, in confining myself to the merepurchasing part, and even in that i rather obeyed the men\"s ordersconveyed through the housekeeper, than went by my own judgment. atone time, the beef was too large, at another the mutton was not fatenough. i think they saw how careful i was to leave them free, and notto intrude my own ideas upon them; so, one day, two or three of themen--my friend higgins among them--asked me if i would not come inand take a snack. it was a very busy day, but i saw that the men wouldbe hurt if, after making the advance, i didn\"t meet them half-way, so iwent in, and i never made a better dinner in my life. i told them (mynext neighbours i mean, for i\"m no speech-maker) how much i\"denjoyed it; and for some time, whenever that especial dinner recurred intheir dietary, i was sure to be met by these men, with a \"master, there\"shot-pot for dinner to-day, win yo\" come?\" if they had not asked me, iwould no more have intruded on them than i\"d have gone to the mess atthe barracks without invitation.\"
　　\"i should think you were rather a restraint on your hosts\" conversation.
　　they can\"t abuse the masters while you\"re there. i suspect they take itout on non-hot-pot days.\"
　　\"well! hitherto we\"ve steered clear of all vexed questions. but if any ofthe old disputes came up again, i would certainly speak out my mindnext hot-pot day. but you are hardly acquainted with our darkshirefellows, for all you\"re a darkshire man yourself they have such a senseof humour, and such a racy mode of expression! i am getting really toknow some of them now, and they talk pretty freely before me.\"
　　\"nothing like the act of eating for equalising men. dying is nothing to it.
　　the philosopher dies sententiously--the pharisee ostentatiously--thesimple-hearted humbly--the poor idiot blindly, as the sparrow falls tothe ground; the philosopher and idiot, publican and pharisee, all eatafter the same fashion--given an equally good digestion. there\"s theoryfor theory for you!\"
　　\"indeed i have no theory; i hate theories.\"
　　\"i beg your pardon. to show my penitence, will you accept a ten poundnote towards your marketing, and give the poor fellows a feast?\"
　　\"thank you; but i\"d rather not. they pay me rent for the oven andcooking-places at the back of the mill: and will have to pay more for thenew dining-room. i don\"t want it to fall into a charity. i don\"t wantdonations. once let in the principle, and i should have people going,and talking, and spoiling the simplicity of the whole thing.\"
　　\"people will talk about any new plan. you can\"t help that.\"
　　\"my enemies, if i have any, may make a philanthropic fuss about thisdinner-scheme; but you are a friend, and i expect you will pay myexperiment the respect of silence. it is but a new broom at present, andsweeps clean enough. but by-and-by we shall meet with plenty ofstumbling-blocks, no doubt.\"
www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ



第149章 CHAPTER XVIII MARGARET\"S FLITTIN\" (1)


　　\"the meanest thing to which we bid adieu,loses its meanness in the parting hour.\"
　　elliott.
　　mrs. shaw took as vehement a dislike as it was possible for one of hergentle nature to do, against milton. it was noisy, and smoky, and thepoor people whom she saw in the streets were dirty, and the rich ladiesover-dressed, and not a man that she saw, high or low, had his clothesmade to fit him. she was sure margaret would never regain her loststrength while she stayed in milton; and she herself was afraid of one ofher old attacks of the nerves. margaret must return with her, and thatquickly. this, if not the exact force of her words, was at any rate thespirit of what she urged on margaret, till the latter, weak, weary, andbroken-spirited, yielded a reluctant promise that, as soon as wednesdaywas over she would prepare to accompany her aunt back to town,leaving dixon in charge of all the arrangements for paying bills,disposing of furniture, and shutting up the house. before thatwednesday--that mournful wednesday, when mr. hale was to beinterred, far away from either of the homes he had known in life, andfar away from the wife who lay lonely among strangers (and this lastwas margaret\"s great trouble, for she thought that if she had not given
　　way to that overwhelming stupor during the first sad days, she couldhave arranged things otherwise)--before that wednesday, margaretreceived a letter from mr. bell.
　　\"my dear margaret:--i did mean to have returned to milton onthursday, but unluckily it turns out to be one of the rare occasionswhen we, plymouth fellows, are called upon to perform any kind ofduty, and i must not be absent from my post. captain lennox and mr.
　　thornton are here. the former seems a smart, well-meaning man; andhas proposed to go over to milton, and assist you in any search for thewill; of course there is none, or you would have found it by this time, ifyou followed my directions. then the captain declares he must takeyou and his mother-in-law home; and, in his wife\"s present state, i don\"tsee how you can expect him to remain away longer than friday.
　　however, that dixon of yours is trusty; and can hold her, or your own,till i come. i will put matters into the hands of my milton attorney ifthere is no will; for i doubt this smart captain is no great man ofbusiness. nevertheless, his moustachios are splendid. there will have tobe a sale, so select what things you wish reserved. or you can send alist afterwards. now two things more, and i have done. you know, or ifyou don\"t, your poor father did, that you are to have my money andgoods when i die. not that i mean to die yet; but i name this lust toexplain what is coming. these lennoxes seem very fond of you now;and perhaps may continue to be; perhaps not. so it is best to start with aformal agreement; namely, that you are to pay them two hundred andfifty pounds a year, as long as you and they find it pleasant to livetogether. (this, of course, includes dixon; mind you don\"t be cajoledinto paying any more for her.) then you won\"t be thrown adrift, if someday the captain wishes to have his house to himself, but you can carryyourself and your two hundred and fifty pounds off somewhere else; if,indeed, i have not claimed you to come and keep house for me first.
　　then as to dress, and dixon, and personal expenses, and confectionery(all young ladies eat confectionery till wisdom comes by age), i shallconsult some lady of my acquaintance, and see how much you will havefrom your father before fixing this. now, margaret, have you flown outbefore you have read this far, and wondered what right the old man hasto settle your affairs for you so cavalierly? i make no doubt you have.
　　yet the old man has a right. he has loved your father for five and thirtyyears; he stood beside him on his wedding-day; he closed his eyes indeath. moreover, he is your godfather; and as he cannot do you muchgood spiritually, having a hidden consciousness of your superiority insuch things, he would fain do you the poor good of endowing youmaterially. and the old man has not a known relation on earth; \"who isthere to mourn for adam bell?\" and his whole heart is set and bent
　　upon this one thing, and margaret hale is not the girl to say him nay.
　　write by return, if only two lines, to tell me your answer. but nothanks.\"
　　margaret took up a pen and scrawled with trembling hand, \"margarethale is not the girl to say him nay.\" in her weak state she could not thinkof any other words, and yet she was vexed to use these. but she was somuch fatigued even by this slight exertion, that if she could havethought of another form of acceptance, she could not have sate up towrite a syllable of it. she was obliged to lie down again, and try not tothink.
　　\"my dearest child! has that letter vexed or troubled you?\"
　　\"no!\" said margaret feebly. \"i shall be better when to-morrow is over.\"
　　\"i feel sure, darling, you won\"t be better till i get you out of this horridair. how you can have borne it this two years i can\"t imagine.\"
　　\"where could i go to? i could not leave papa and mamma.\"
　　\"well! don\"t distress yourself, my dear. i dare say it was all for the best,only i had no conception of how you were living. our butler\"s wife livesin a better house than this.\"
　　\"it is sometimes very pretty--in summer; you can\"t judge by what it isnow. i have been very happy here,\" and margaret closed her eyes byway of stopping the conversation.
　　the house teemed with comfort now, compared to what it had done.
　　the evenings were chilly, and by mrs. shaw\"s directions fires werelighted in every bedroom. she petted margaret in every possible way,and bought every delicacy, or soft luxury in which she herself wouldhave burrowed and sought comfort. but margaret was indifferent to allthese things; or, if they forced themselves upon her attention, it wassimply as causes for gratitude to her aunt, who was putting herself somuch out of her way to think of her. she was restless, though so weak.
　　all the day long, she kept herself from thinking of the ceremony whichwas going on at oxford, by wandering from room to room, andlanguidly setting aside such articles as she wished to retain. dixonfollowed her by mrs. shaw\"s desire, ostensibly to receive instructions,but with a private injunction to soothe her into repose as soon as mightbe.
www.xiabook.com下{书}网



第150章 CHAPTER XVIII MARGARET\"S FLITTIN\" (2)


　　\"these books, dixon, i will keep. all the rest will you send to mr. bell?
　　they are of a kind that he will value for themselves, as well as forpapa\"s sake. this----i should like you to take this to mr. thornton, afteri am gone. stay; i will write a note with it.\" and she sate down hastily,as if afraid of thinking, and wrote:
　　\"dear sir,--the accompanying book i am sure will be valued by youfor the sake of my father, to whom it belonged.
　　\"yours sincerely,
　　\"margaret hale.\"
　　she set out again upon her travels through the house, turning overarticles, known to her from her childhood, with a sort of caressingreluctance to leave them--old-fashioned, worn and shabby, as theymight be. but she hardly spoke again; and dixon\"s report to mrs. shawwas, that \"she doubted whether miss hale heard a word of what shesaid, though she talked the whole time, in order to divert her attention.\"
　　the consequence of being on her feet all day was excessive bodilyweariness in the evening, and a better night\"s rest than she had had sinceshe had heard of mr. hale\"s death.
　　at breakfast time the next day, she expressed her wish to go and bidone or two friends good-bye. mrs. shaw objected:
　　\"i am sure, my dear, you can have no friends here with whom you aresufficiently intimate to justify you in calling upon them so soon; beforeyou have been at church.\"
　　\"but to-day is my only day; if captain lennox comes this afternoon, andif we must--if i must really go to-morrow----\"
　　\"oh, yes; we shall go to-morrow. i am more and more convinced thatthis air is bad for you, and makes you look so pale and ill; besides,edith expects us; and she may be waiting me; and you cannot be leftalone, my dear, at your age. no; if you must pay these calls, i will gowith you. dixon can get us a coach, i suppose?\"
　　so mrs. shaw went to take care of margaret, and took her maid withher to, take care of the shawls and air-cushions. margaret\"s face was toosad to lighten up into a smile at all this preparation for paying twovisits, that she had often made by herself at all hours of the day. shewas half afraid of owning that one place to which she was going wasnicholas higgins\"; all she could do was to hope her aunt would beindisposed to get out of the coach, and walk up the court, and at everybreath of wind have her face slapped by wet clothes, hanging out to dryon ropes stretched from house to house.
　　there was a little battle in mrs. shaw\"s mind between ease and a senseof matronly propriety; but the former gained the day; and with many aninjunction to margaret to be careful of herself, and not to catch anyfever, such as was always lurking in such places, her aunt permitted herto go where she had often been before without taking any precaution orrequiring any permission.
　　nicholas was out; only mary and one or two of the boucher children athome. margaret was vexed with herself for not having timed her visitbetter. mary had a very blunt intellect, although her feelings were warmand kind; and the instant she understood what margaret\"s purpose wasin coming to see them, she began to cry and sob with so little restraintthat margaret found it useless to say any of the thousand little things
　　which had suggested themselves to her as she was coming along in thecoach. she could only try to comfort her a little by suggesting the vaguechance of their meeting again, at some possible time, in some possibleplace, and bid her tell her father how much she wished, if he couldmanage it, that he should come to see her when he had done his work inthe evening.
　　as she was leaving the place, she stopped and looked round; thenhesitated a little before she said:
　　\"i should like to have some little thing to remind me of bessy.\"
　　instantly mary\"s generosity was keenly alive. what could they give?
　　and on margaret\"s singling out a little common drinking-cup, which sheremembered as the one always standing by bessy\"s side with drink forher feverish lips, mary said:
　　\"oh, take summut better; that only cost fourpence!\"
　　\"that will do, thank you,\" said margaret; and she went quickly away,while the light caused by the pleasure of having something to give yetlingered on mary\"s face.
　　\"now to mrs. thornton\"s,\" thought she to herself. \"it must be done.\" butshe looked rather rigid and pale at the thought of it, and had hard workto find the exact words in which to explain to her aunt who mrs.
　　thornton was, and why she should go to bid her farewell.
　　they (for mrs. shaw alighted here) were shown into the drawing-room,in which a fire had only just been kindled. mrs. shaw huddled herselfup in her shawl, and shivered.
　　\"what an icy room!\" she said.
　　they had to wait for some time before mrs. thornton entered. therewas some softening in her heart towards margaret, now that she wasgoing away out of her sight. she remembered her spirit, as shown atvarious times and places even more than the patience with which shehad endured long and wearing cares. her countenance was blander thanusual, as she greeted her; there was even a shade of tenderness in hermanner, as she noticed the white, tear-swollen face, and the quiver inthe voice which margaret tried to make so steady.
　　\"allow me to introduce my aunt, mrs. shaw. i am going away frommilton to-morrow; i do not know if you are aware of it; but i wanted tosee you once again, mrs. thornton, to--to apologise for my manner thelast time i saw you; and to say that i am sure you meant kindly-howevermuch we may have misunderstood each other.\"
　　mrs. shaw looked extremely perplexed by what margaret had said.
　　thanks for kindness! and apologies for failure in good manners! butmrs. thornton replied:
　　\"miss hale, i am glad you do me justice. i did no more than i believedto be my duty in remonstrating with you as i did. i have always desired
　　to act the part of a friend to you. i am glad you do me justice.\"
　　\"and,\" said margaret, blushing excessively as she spoke, \"will you do mejustice, and believe that though i cannot--i do not choose--to giveexplanations of my conduct, i have not acted in the unbecoming wayyou apprehended?\"
　　margaret\"s voice was so soft, and her eyes so pleading, that mrs.
　　thornton was for once affected by the charm of manner to which shehad hitherto proved herself invulnerable.
www.xiabook.com下 //书 //网



第151章 CHAPTER XVIII MARGARET\"S FLITTIN\" (3)


　　\"yes, i do believe you. let us say no more about it. where are yougoing to reside, miss hale? i understood from mr. bell that you weregoing to leave milton. you never liked milton, you know,\" said mrs.
　　thornton, with a sort of grim smile; \"but for all that, you must notexpect me to congratulate you on quitting it. where shall you live?\"
　　\"with my aunt,\" replied margaret, turning towards mrs. shaw.
　　\"my niece will reside with me in harley street. she is almost like adaughter to me,\" said mrs. shaw, looking fondly at margaret; \"and i amglad to acknowledge my own obligation for any kindness that has beenshown to her. if you and your husband ever come to town, my son anddaughter, captain and mrs. lennox, will, i am sure, join with me inwishing to do anything in our power to show you attention.\"
　　mrs. thornton thought in her own mind, that margaret had not takenmuch care to enlighten her aunt as to the relationship between the mr.
　　and mrs. thornton, towards whom the fine-lady aunt was extending hersoft patronage; so she answered shortly,\"my husband is dead. mr. thornton is my son. i never go to london; soi am not likely to be able to avail myself of your polite offers.\"
　　at this instant mr. thornton entered the room; he had only just returnedfrom oxford. his mourning suit spoke of the reason that had called himthere.
　　\"john,\" said his mother, \"this lady is mrs. shaw, miss hale\"s aunt. i amsorry to say, that miss hale\"s call is to wish us good-bye.\"
　　\"you are going then!\" said he, in a low voice.
　　\"yes,\" said margaret. \"we leave to-morrow.\"
　　\"my son-in-law comes this evening to escort us,\" said mrs. shaw.
　　mr. thornton turned away. he had not sat down, and now he seemed tobe examining something on the table, almost as if he had discovered anunopened letter, which had made him forget the present company. hedid not even seem to be aware when they got up to take leave. hestarted forwards, however, to hand mrs. shaw down to the carriage. asit drove up, he and margaret stood close together on the door-step, andit was impossible but that the recollection of the day of the riot shouldforce itself into both their minds. into his it came associated with thespeeches of the following day; her passionate declaration that there was
　　not a man in all that violent and desperate crowd, for whom she did notcare as much as for him. and at the remembrance of her taunting words,his brow grew stern, though his heart beat thick with longing love. \"no!\"
　　said he, \"i put it to the touch once, and i lost it all. let her go,--with herstony heart, and her beauty;--how set and terrible her look is now, forall her loveliness of feature! she is afraid i shall speak what will requiresome stern repression. let her go. beauty and heiress as she may be,she will find it hard to meet with a truer heart than mine. let her go!\"
　　and there was no tone of regret, or emotion of any kind in the voicewith which he said good-bye; and the offered hand was taken with aresolute calmness, and dropped as carelessly as if it had been a dead andwithered flower. but none in his household saw mr. thornton againthat day. he was busily engaged; or so he said.
　　margaret\"s strength was so utterly exhausted by these visits, that she hadto submit to much watching, and petting, and sighing \"i-told-you-so\"s,\"
　　from her aunt. dixon said she was quite as bad as she had been on thefirst day she heard of her father\"s death; and she and mrs. shawconsulted as to the desirableness of delaying the morrow\"s journey. butwhen her aunt reluctantly proposed a few days\" delay to margaret, thelatter writhed her body as if in acute suffering, and said:
　　\"oh! let us go. i cannot be patient here. i shall not get well here. i wantto forget.\"
　　so the arrangements went on; and captain lennox came, and with himnews of edith and the little boy; and margaret found that theindifferent, careless conversation of one who, however kind, was nottoo warm and anxious a sympathiser, did her good. she roused up; andby the time that she knew she might expect higgins, she was able toleave the room quietly, and await in her own chamber the expectedsummons.
　　\"eh!\" said he, as she came in, \"to think of th\" oud gentleman dropping offas he did! yo\" might ha\" knocked me down wi\" a straw when they telledme. \"mr. hale?\" said i; \"him as was th\" parson?\" \"ay,\" said they.
　　\"then,\" said i, \"there\"s as good a man gone as ever lived on this earth,let who will be t\" other!\" and i came to see yo\", and tell yo\" how grievedi were, but them women in th\" kitchen wouldn\"t tell yo\" i were there.
　　they said yo\" were ill,--and butter me, but yo\" dunnot look like th\" samewench. and yo\"re going to be a grand lady up i\" lunnon, aren\"t yo\"?\"
　　\"not a grand lady,\" said margaret, half smiling.
　　\"well! thornton said--says he, a day or two ago, \"higgins, have yo\" seenmiss hale?\" \"no,\" says i; \"there\"s a pack o\" women who won\"t let me ather. but i can bide my time, if she\"s ill. she and i knows each otherpretty well; and hoo\"l not go doubting that i\"m main sorry for th\" oudgentleman\"s death, just because i can\"t get at her and tell her so.\" and
　　says he, \"yo\"ll not have much time for to try and see her, my fine chap.
　　she\"s not for staying with us a day longer nor she can help. she\"s gotgrand relations, and they\"re carrying her off; and we sha\"n\"t see her nomore.\" \"measter,\" said i, \"if i dunnot see her afore hoo goes, i\"ll striveto get up to lunnun next whissuntide, that i will. i\"ll not be baulked ofsaying her good-bye by any relations whatsomdever.\" but, bless yo\", iknowed yo\"d come. it were only for to humour the measter, i let on as ifi thought yo\"d mappen leave milton without seeing me.\"
　　\"you\"re quite right,\" said margaret. \"you only do me justice. and you\"llnot forget me, i\"m sure. if no one else in milton remembers me, i\"mcertain you will; and papa too. you know how good and how tender hewas. look, higgins! here is his bible. i have kept it for you. i can illspare it; but i know he would have liked you to have it. i\"m sure you\"llcare for it, and study what is in it, for his sake.\"
　　\"yo\" may say that. if it were the deuce\"s own scribble, and yo\" axed meto read in it for yo\"r sake, and th\" oud gentleman\"s, i\"d do it. whatten\"sthis, wench? i\"m not going for to take yo\"r brass, so dunnot think it.
　　we\"ve been great friends, \"bout the sound o\" money passing between us,\"
　　\"for the children--for boucher\"s children,\" said margaret, hurriedly.
　　\"they may need it. you\"ve no right to refuse it for them. i would notgive you a penny,\" she said, smiling; \"don\"t think there\"s any of it foryou.\"
　　\"well, wench! i can nobbut say, bless yo\"! and bless yo\"!--and amen.\"
www.xiabook.com



第152章 CHAPTER XIX EASE NOT PEACE (1)


　　\"a dull rotation, never at a stay,yesterday\"s face twin image of to-day.\"
　　cowper.
　　\"of what each one should be, he sees the form and rule,and till he reach to that, his joy can ne\"er be full.\"
　　ruckert.
　　it was very well for margaret that the extreme quiet of the harley streethouse, during edith\"s recovery from her confinement, gave her thenatural rest which she needed. it gave her time to comprehend thesudden change which had taken place in her circumstances within thelast two months. she found herself at once an inmate of a luxurioushouse, where the bare knowledge of the existence of every trouble orcare seemed scarcely to have penetrated. the wheels of the machineryof daily life were well oiled, and went along with delicious smoothness.
　　mrs. shaw and edith could hardly make enough of margaret, on herreturn to what they persisted in calling her home. and she felt that itwas almost ungrateful in her to have a secret feeling that the helstonevicarage--nay, even the poor little house at milton, with her anxiousfather and her invalid mother, and all the small household cares ofcomparative poverty, composed her idea of home. edith was impatientto get well, in order to fill margaret\"s bed-room with all the softcomforts, and pretty nick-knacks, with which her own abounded. mrs.
　　shaw and her maid found plenty of occupation in restoring margaret\"swardrobe to a state of elegant variety. captain lennox was easy, kind,and gentlemanly; sate with his wife in her dressing-room an hour or twoevery day; played with his little boy for another hour, and lounged awaythe rest of his time at his club, when he was not engaged out to dinner.
　　just before margaret had recovered from her necessity for quiet andrepose--before she had begun to feel her life wanting and dull--edithcame down-stairs and resumed her usual part in the household; andmargaret fell into the old habit of watching, and admiring, andministering to her cousin. she gladly took all charge of the semblancesof duties off edith\"s hands; answered notes, reminded her ofengagements, tended her when no gaiety was in prospect, and she wasconsequently rather inclined to fancy herself ill. but all the rest of thefamily were in the full business of the london season, and margaretwas often left alone. then her thoughts went back to milton, with astrange sense of the contrast between the life there, and here. she wasgetting surfeited of the eventless ease in which no struggle or endeavourwas required. she was afraid lest she should even become sleepilydeadened into forgetfulness of anything beyond the life which waslapping her round with luxury. there might be toilers and moilers therein london, but she never saw them; the very servants lived in anunderground world of their own, of which she knew neither the hopesnor the fears; they only seemed to start into existence when some wantor whim of their master and mistress needed them. there was a strangeunsatisfied vacuum in margaret\"s heart and mode of life; and, oncewhen she had dimly hinted this to edith, the latter, wearied with
　　dancing the night before, languidly stroked margaret\"s cheek as she satby her in the old attitude,--she on a footstool by the sofa where edithlay.
　　\"poor child!\" said edith. \"it is a little sad for you to be left, night afternight, just at this time when all the world is so gay. but we shall behaving our dinner-parties soon--as soon as henry comes back fromcircuit--and then there will be a little pleasant variety for you. nowonder it is moped, poor darling!\"
　　margaret did not feel as if the dinner-parties would be a panacea. butedith piqued herself on her dinner-parties; \"so different,\" as she said,\"from the old dowager dinners under mamma\"s regime;\" and mrs. shawherself seemed to take exactly the same kind of pleasure in the verydifferent arrangements and circle of acquaintances which were tocaptain and mrs. lennox\"s taste, as she did in the more formal andponderous entertainments which she herself used to give. captainlennox was always extremely kind and brotherly to margaret. she wasreally very fond of him, excepting when he was anxiously attentive toedith\"s dress and appearance, with a view to her beauty making asufficient impression on the world. then all the latent vashti inmargaret was roused, and she could hardly keep herself fromexpressing her feelings.
　　the course of margaret\"s day was this; a quiet hour or two before a latebreakfast; an unpunctual meal, lazily eaten by weary and half-awakepeople, but yet at which, in all its dragged-out length, she was expectedto be present, because, directly afterwards, came a discussion of plans,at which, although they none of them concerned her, she was expectedto give her sympathy, if she could not assist with her advice; an endlessnumber of notes to write, which edith invariably left to her, with manycaressing compliments as to her eloquence du billet; a little play withsholto as he returned from his morning\"s walk; besides the care of thechildren during the servants\" dinner; a drive or callers; and some dinneror morning engagement for her aunt and cousins, which left margaretfree, it is true, but rather wearied with the inactivity of the day, comingupon depressed spirits and delicate health.
wＷw。xiabｏok.com/



第153章 CHAPTER XIX EASE NOT PEACE (2)


　　she looked forward with longing, though unspoken interest to thehomely object of dixon\"s return from milton; where, until now, the oldservant had been busily engaged in winding up all the affairs of thehale family. it had appeared a sudden famine to her heart, this entirecessation of any news respecting the people amongst whom she hadlived so long. it was true, that dixon, in her business-letters, quoted,every now and then, an opinion of mr. thornton\"s as to what she hadbetter do about the furniture, or how act in regard to the landlord of thecrampton terrace house. but it was only here and there that the name
　　came in, or any milton name, indeed; and margaret was sitting oneevening, all alone in the lennoxes\"s drawing-room, not reading dixon\"sletters, which yet she held in her hand, but thinking over them, andrecalling the days which had been, and picturing the busy life out ofwhich her own had been taken and never missed; wondering if all wenton in that whirl just as if she and her father had never been; questioningwithin herself, if no one in all the crowd missed her, (not higgins, shewas not thinking of him,) when, suddenly, mr. bell was announced; andmargaret hurried the letters into her work-basket, and started up,blushing as if she had been doing some guilty thing.
　　\"oh, mr. bell! i never thought of seeing you!\"
　　\"but you give me a welcome, i hope, as well as that very pretty start ofsurprise.\"
　　\"have you dined? how did you come? let me order you some dinner.\"
　　\"if you\"re going to have any. otherwise, you know, there is no one whocares less for eating than i do. but where are the others? gone out todinner? left you alone?\"
　　\"oh yes! and it is such a rest. i was just thinking--but will you run therisk of dinner? i don\"t know if there is anything in the house.\"
　　\"why, to tell you the truth, i dined at my club. only they don\"t cook aswell as they did, so i thought, if you were going to dine, i might try andmake out my dinner. but never mind, never mind! there aren\"t tencooks in england to be trusted at impromptu dinners. if their skill andtheir fires will stand it, their tempers won\"t. you shall make me sometea, margaret. and now, what were you thinking of? you were going totell me. whose letters were those, god-daughter, that you hid away sospeedily?\"
　　\"only dixon\"s,\" replied margaret, growing very red.
　　\"whew! is that all? who do you think came up in the train with me?\"
　　\"i don\"t know,\" said margaret, resolved against making a guess.
　　\"your what d\"ye call him? what\"s the right name for a cousin-in-law\"sbrother?\"
　　\"mr. henry lennox?\" asked margaret.
　　\"yes,\" replied mr. bell. \"you knew him formerly, didn\"t you? what sortof a person is he, margaret?\"
　　\"i liked him long ago,\" said margaret, glancing down for a moment. andthen she looked straight up and went on in her natural manner. \"youknow we have been corresponding about frederick since; but i have notseen him for nearly three years, and he may be changed. what did youthink of him?\"
　　\"i don\"t know. he was so busy trying to find out who i was, in the firstinstance, and what i was in the second, that he never let out what hewas; unless indeed that veiled curiosity of his as to what manner of man
　　he had to talk to was not a good piece, and a fair indication of hischaracter. do you call him good looking, margaret?\"
　　\"no! certainly not. do you?\"
　　\"not i. but i thought, perhaps, you might. is he a great deal here?\"
　　\"i fancy he is when he is in town. he has been on circuit now since icame. but--mr. bell--have you come from oxford or from milton?\"
　　\"from milton. don\"t you see i\"m smoke-dried?\"
　　\"certainly. but i thought that it might be the effect of the antiquities ofoxford.\"
　　\"come now, be a sensible woman! in oxford, i could have managed allthe landlords in the place, and had my own way, with half the troubleyour milton landlord has given me, and defeated me after all. he won\"ttake the house off our hands till next june twelvemonth. luckily, mr.
　　thornton found a tenant for it. why don\"t you ask after mr. thornton,margaret? he has proved himself a very active friend of yours, i can tellyou. taken more than half the trouble off my hands.\"
　　\"and how is he? how is mrs. thornton?\" asked margaret hurriedly andbelow her breath, though she tried to speak out.
　　\"i suppose they\"re well. i\"ve been staying at their house till i was drivenout of it by the perpetual clack about that thornton girl\"s marriage. itwas too much for thornton himself, though she was his sister. he usedto go and sit in his own room perpetually. he\"s getting past the age forcaring for such things, either as principal or accessory. i was surprisedto find the old lady falling into the current, and carried away by herdaughter\"s enthusiasm for orange-blossoms and lace. i thought mrs.
　　thornton had been made of sterner stuff.\"
　　\"she would put on any assumption of feeling to veil her daughter\"sweakness,\" said margaret in a low voice.
　　\"perhaps so. you\"ve studied her, have you? she doesn\"t seem over fondof you, margaret.\"
　　\"i know it,\" said margaret. \"oh, here is tea at last!\" exclaimed she, as ifrelieved. and with tea came mr. henry lennox, who had walked up toharley street after a late dinner, and had evidently expected to find hisbrother and sister-in-law at home. margaret suspected him of being asthankful as she was at the presence of a third party, on this their firstmeeting since the memorable day of his offer, and her refusal athelstone. she could hardly tell what to say at first, and was thankful forall the tea-table occupations, which gave her an excuse for keepingsilence, and him an opportunity of recovering himself. for, to tell thetruth, he had rather forced himself up to harley street this evening, witha view of getting over an awkward meeting, awkward even in thepresence of captain lennox and edith, and doubly awkward now thathe found her the only lady there, and the person to whom he must
　　naturally and perforce address a great part of his conversation. she wasthe first to recover her self-possession. she began to talk on the subjectwhich came uppermost in her mind, after the first flush of awkwardshyness.
　　\"mr. lennox, i have been so much obliged to you for all you have doneabout frederick.\"
wwＷ．7wenxue.com下{书}网



第154章 CHAPTER XIX EASE NOT PEACE (3)


　　\"i am only sorry it has been so unsuccessful,\" replied he, with a quickglance towards mr. bell, as if reconnoitring how much he might saybefore him. margaret, as if she read his thought, addressed herself tomr. bell, both including him in the conversation, and implying that hewas perfectly aware of the endeavours that had been made to clearfrederick.
　　\"that horrocks--that very last witness of all, has proved as unavailing asall the others. mr. lennox has discovered that he sailed for australiaonly last august; only two months before frederick was in england,and gave us the names of----\"
　　\"frederick in england! you never told me that!\" exclaimed mr. bell insurprise.
　　\"i thought you knew. i never doubted you had been told. of course, itwas a great secret, and perhaps i should not have named it now,\" saidmargaret, a little dismayed.
　　\"i have never named it to either my brother or your cousin,\" said mr.
　　lennox, with a little professional dryness of implied reproach.
　　\"never mind, margaret. i am not living in a talking, babbling world, noryet among people who are trying to worm facts out of me; you needn\"tlook so frightened because you have let the cat out of the bag to afaithful old hermit like me. i shall never name his having been inengland; i shall be out of temptation, for no one will ask me. stay!\"
　　(interrupting himself rather abruptly) \"was it at your mother\"s funeral?\"
　　\"he was with mamma when she died,\" said margaret, softly.
　　\"to be sure! to be sure! why, some one asked me if he had not beenover then, and i denied it stoutly--not many weeks ago--who could ithave been? oh! i recollect!\"
　　but he did not say the name; and although margaret would have givenmuch to know if her suspicions were right, and it had been mr.
　　thornton who had made the enquiry, she could not ask the question ofmr. bell, much as she longed to do so.
　　there was a pause for a moment or two. then mr. lennox said,addressing himself to margaret, \"i suppose as mr. bell is nowacquainted with all the circumstances attending your brother\"sunfortunate dilemma, i cannot do better than inform him exactly howthe research into the evidence we once hoped to produce in his favourstands at present. so, if he will do me the honour to breakfast with me
　　to-morrow, we will go over the names of these missing gentry.\"
　　\"i should like to hear all the particulars, if i may. cannot you comehere? i dare not ask you both to breakfast, though i am sure you wouldbe welcome. but let me know all i can about frederick, even thoughthere may be no hope at present.\"
　　\"i have an engagement at half-past eleven. but i will certainly come ifyou wish it,\" replied mr. lennox, with a little afterthought of extremewillingness, which made margaret shrink into herself, and almost wishthat she had not proposed her natural request. mr. bell got up andlooked around him for his hat, which had been removed to make roomfor tea.
　　\"well!\" said he, \"i don\"t know what mr. lennox is inclined to do, but i\"mdisposed to be moving off homewards. i\"ve been a journey to-day, andjourneys begin to tell upon my sixty and odd years.\"
　　\"i believe i shall stay and see my brother and sister,\" said mr. lennox,making no movement of departure. margaret was seized with a shyawkward dread of being left alone with him. the scene on the littleterrace in the helstone garden was so present to her, that she couldhardly help believing it was so with him.
　　\"don\"t go yet, please, mr. bell,\" said she, hastily. \"i want you to seeedith; and i want edith to know you. please!\" said she, laying a light butdetermined hand on his arm. he looked at her, and saw the confusionstirring in her countenance; he sate down again, as if her little touch hadbeen possessed of resistless strength.
　　\"you see how she overpowers me, mr. lennox,\" said he. \"and i hopeyou noticed the happy choice of her expressions; she wants me to \"see\"this cousin edith, who, i am told, is a great beauty; but she has thehonesty to change her word when she comes to me--mrs. lennox is to\"know\" me. i suppose i am not much to \"see,\" eh, margaret?\"
　　he joked, to give her time to recover from the slight flutter which hehad detected in her manner on his proposal to leave; and she caught thetone, and threw the ball back. mr. lennox wondered how his brother,the captain, could have reported her as having lost all her good looks.
　　to be sure, in her quiet black dress, she was a contrast to edith, dancingin her white crape mourning, and long floating golden hair, all softnessand glitter. she dimpled and blushed most becomingly when introducedto mr. bell, conscious that she had her reputation as a beauty to keepup, and that it would not do to have a mordecai refusing to worship andadmire, even in the shape of an old fellow of a college, which nobodyhad ever heard of. mrs. shaw and captain lennox, each in theirseparate way, gave mr. bell a kind and sincere welcome, winning himover to like them almost in spite of himself, especially when he sawhow naturally margaret took her place as sister and daughter of the
　　house.
　　\"what a shame that we were not at home to receive you,\" said edith.
　　\"you, too, henry! though i don\"t know that we should have stayed athome for you. and for mr. bell! for margaret\"s mr. bell----\"
wＷw。xiabｏok.com  #下!书! 网



第155章 CHAPTER XIX EASE NOT PEACE (4)


　　\"there is no knowing what sacrifices you would not have made,\" saidher brother-in-law. \"even a dinner-party! and the delight of wearing thisvery becoming dress.\"
　　edith did not know whether to frown or to smile. but it did not suit mr.
　　lennox to drive her to the first of these alternatives; so he went on.
　　\"will you show your readiness to make sacrifices to-morrow morning,first by asking me to breakfast, to meet mr. bell, and secondly, bybeing so kind as to order it at half-past nine, instead of ten o\"clock? ihave some letters and papers that i want to show to miss hale and mr.
　　bell.\"
　　\"i hope mr. bell will make our house his own during his stay inlondon,\" said captain lennox. \"i am only so sorry we cannot offer hima bed-room.\"
　　\"thank you. i am much obliged to you. you would only think me achurl if you had, for i should decline it, i believe, in spite of all thetemptations of such agreeable company,\" said mr. bell, bowing allround, and secretly congratulating himself on the neat turn he had givento his sentence, which, if put into plain language, would have beenmore to this effect: \"i couldn\"t stand the restraints of such a proper-behaved and civil-spoken set of people as these are: it would be likemeat without salt. i\"m thankful they haven\"t a bed. and how well irounded my sentence! i am absolutely catching the trick of goodmanners\"
　　his self-satisfaction lasted him till he was fairly out in the streets,walking side by side with henry lennox. here he suddenlyremembered margaret\"s little look of entreaty as she urged him to staylonger, and he also recollected a few hints given him long ago by anacquaintance of mr. lennox\"s, as to his admiration of margaret. it gavea new direction to his thoughts. \"you have known miss hale for a longtime, i believe. how do you think her looking? she strikes me as paleand ill.\"
　　\"i thought her looking remarkably well. perhaps not when i first came in-now i think of it. but certainly, when she grew animated, she looked aswell as ever i saw her do.\"
　　\"she has had a great deal to go through,\" said mr. bell.
　　\"yes! i have been sorry to hear of all she has had to bear; not merely thecommon and universal sorrow arising from death, but all the annoyancewhich her father\"s conduct must have caused her, and then----\"
　　\"her father\"s conduct!\" said mr. bell, in an accent of surprise. \"you must
　　have heard some wrong statement. he behaved in the mostconscientious manner. he showed more resolute strength than i shouldever have given him credit for formerly.\"
　　\"perhaps i have been wrongly informed. but i have been told, by hissuccessor in the living--a clever, sensible man, and a thoroughly activeclergyman--that there was no call upon mr. hale to do what he did,relinquish the living, and throw himself and his family on the tendermercies of private teaching in a manufacturing town; the bishop hadoffered him another living, it is true, but if he had come to entertaincertain doubts, he could have remained where he was, and so had nooccasion to resign. but the truth is, these country clergymen live suchisolated lives--isolated, i mean, from all intercourse with men of equalcultivation with themselves, by whose minds they might regulate theirown, and discover when they were going either too fast or too slow-thatthey are very apt to disturb themselves with imaginary doubts as tothe articles of faith, and throw up certain opportunities of doing goodfor very uncertain fancies of their own.\"
　　\"i differ from you. i do not think they are very apt to do as my poorfriend hale did.\" mr. bell was inwardly chafing.
　　\"perhaps i used too general an expression, in saying \"very apt.\" butcertainly, their lives are such as very often to produce either inordinateself-sufficiency, or a morbid state of conscience,\" replied mr. lennoxwith perfect coolness.
　　\"you don\"t meet with any self-sufficiency among the lawyers, forinstance?\" asked mr. bell. \"and seldom, i imagine, any cases of morbidconscience.\" he was becoming more and more vexed, and forgetting hislately-caught trick of good manners. mr. lennox saw now that he hadannoyed his companion; and as he had talked pretty much for the sakeof saying something, and so passing the time while their road laytogether, he was very indifferent as to the exact side he took upon thequestion, and quietly came round by saying: \"to be sure, there issomething fine in a man of mr. hale\"s age leaving his home of twentyyears, and giving up all settled habits, for an idea which was probablyerroneous--but that does not matter--an untangible thought. one cannothelp admiring him, with a mixture of pity in one\"s admiration,something like what one feels for don quixote. such a gentleman as hewas too! i shall never forget the refined and simple hospitality heshowed to me that last day at helstone.\"
　　only half mollified, and yet anxious, in order to lull certain qualms ofhis own conscience, to believe that mr. hale\"s conduct had a tinge ofquixotism in it, mr. bell growled out--\"aye! and you don\"t knowmilton. such a change from helstone! it is years since i have been athelstone--but i\"ll answer for it, it is standing there yet--every stick and
　　every stone as it has done for the last century, while milton! i go thereevery four or five years--and i was born there--yet i do assure you, ioften lose my way--aye, among the very piles of warehouses that arebuilt upon my father\"s orchard. do we part here? well, good night, sir; isuppose we shall meet in harley street to-morrow morning.\"
下…书 网



第156章 CHAPTER XX NOT ALL A DREAM


　　\"where are the sounds that swam alongthe buoyant air when i was young?
　　the last vibration now is o\"er,and they who listened are no more;ah! let me close my eyes and dream.\"
　　w. s. landor.
　　the idea of helstone had been suggested to mr. bell\"s waking mind byhis conversation with mr. lennox, and all night long it ran riot throughhis dreams. he was again the tutor in the college where he now held therank of fellow; it was again a long vacation, and he was staying withhis newly married friend, the proud husband, and happy vicar ofhelstone. over babbling brooks they took impossible leaps, whichseemed to keep them whole days suspended in the air. time and spacewere not, though all other things seemed real. every event wasmeasured by the emotions of the mind, not by its actual existence, forexistence it had none. but the trees were gorgeous in their autumnalleafiness--the warm odours of flower and herb came sweet upon thesense--the young wife moved about her house with just that mixture ofannoyance at her position, as regarded wealth, with pride in herhandsome and devoted husband, which mr. bell had noticed in real lifea quarter of a century ago. the dream was so like life that, when heawoke, his present life seemed like a dream. where was he? in theclose, handsomely furnished room of a london hotel! where were
　　those who spoke to him, moved around him, touched him, not an instantago? dead! buried! lost for evermore, as far as earth\"s for evermorewould extend. he was an old man, so lately exultant in the full strengthof manhood. the utter loneliness of his life was insupportable to thinkabout. he got up hastily, and tried to forget what never more might be,in a hurried dressing for the breakfast in harley street.
　　he could not attend to all the lawyer\"s details, which, as he saw, mademargaret\"s eyes dilate, and her lips grow pale, as one by one fatedecreed, or so it seemed, every morsel of evidence which wouldexonerate frederick, should fall from beneath her feet and disappear.
　　even mr. lennox\"s well-regulated professional voice took a softer,tenderer tone, as he drew near to the extinction of the last hope. it wasnot that margaret had not been perfectly aware of the result before. itwas only that the details of each successive disappointment came withsuch relentless minuteness to quench all hope, that she at last fairlygave way to tears. mr. lennox stopped reading.
　　\"i had better not go on,\" said he, in a concerned voice. \"it was a foolishproposal of mine. lieutenant hale,\" and even this giving him the title ofthe service from which he had so harshly been expelled, was soothingto margaret, \"lieutenant hale is happy now; more secure in fortune andfuture prospects than he could ever have been in the navy; and has,doubtless, adopted his wife\"s country as his own.\"
　　\"that is it,\" said margaret. \"it seems so selfish in me to regret it,\" trying tosmile, \"and yet he is lost to me, and i am so lonely.\" mr. lennox turnedover his papers, and wished that he were as rich and prosperous as hebelieved he should be some day. mr. bell blew his nose, but, otherwise,he also kept silence; and margaret, in a minute or two, had apparentlyrecovered her usual composure. she thanked mr. lennox verycourteously for his trouble; all the more courteously and graciouslybecause she was conscious that, by her behaviour, he might haveprobably been led to imagine that he had given her needless pain. yet itwas pain she would not have been without.
　　mr. bell came up to wish her good-bye.
　　\"margaret!\" said he, as he fumbled with his gloves. \"i am going down tohelstone to-morrow, to look at the old place. would you like to comewith me? or would it give you too much pain? speak out, don\"t beafraid.\"
　　\"oh, mr. bell,\" said she--and could say no more. but she took his oldgouty hand, and kissed it.
　　\"come, come; that\"s enough,\" said he, reddening with awkwardness. \"isuppose your aunt shaw will trust you with me. we\"ll go to-morrowmorning, and we shall get there about two o\"clock, i fancy. we\"ll take asnack, and order dinner at the little inn--the lennard arms, it used to
　　be,--and go and get an appetite in the forest. can you stand it,margaret? it will be a trial, i know, to both of us, but it will be apleasure to me, at least. and there we\"ll dine--it will be but doe-venison,if we can get it at all--and then i\"ll take my nap while you go out and seeold friends. i\"ll give you back safe and sound, barring railway accidents,and i\"ll insure your life for a thousand pounds before starting, whichmay be some comfort to your relations; but otherwise, i\"ll bring youback to mrs. shaw by lunch-time on friday. so, if you say yes, i\"ll justgo up-stairs and propose it.\"
　　\"it\"s no use my trying to say how much i shall like it,\" said margaret,through her tears.
　　\"well, then, prove your gratitude by keeping those fountains of yoursdry for the next two days. if you don\"t, i shall feel queer myself aboutthe lachrymal ducts, and i don\"t like that.\"
　　\"i won\"t cry a drop,\" said margaret, winking her eyes to shake the tearsoff her eye-lashes, and forcing a smile.
　　\"there\"s my good girl. then we\"ll go up-stairs and settle it all.\" margaretwas in a state of almost trembling eagerness, while mr. bell discussedhis plan with her aunt shaw, who was first startled, then doubtful andperplexed, and in the end, yielding rather to the rough force of mr.
　　bell\"s words than to her own conviction; for to the last, whether it wasright or wrong, proper or improper, she could not settle to her ownsatisfaction, till margaret\"s safe return, the happy fulfilment of theproject, gave her decision enough to say, \"she was sure it had been avery kind thought of mr. bell\"s, and just what she herself had beenwishing for margaret, as giving her the very change which she required,after all the anxious time she had had.\"




第157章 CHAPTER XXI ONCE AND NOW (1)


　　\"so on those happy days of yoreoft as i dare to dwell once more,still must i miss the friends so tried,whom death has severed from my side.
　　but ever when true friendship binds,spirit it is that spirit finds;in spirit then our bliss we found,in spirit yet to them i\"m bound.\"
　　uhland.
　　margaret was ready long before the appointed time, and had leisureenough to cry a little, quietly, when unobserved, and to smile brightlywhen any one looked at her. her last alarm was lest they should be toolate and miss the train; but no! they were all in time; and she breathedfreely and happily at length, seated in the carriage opposite to mr. bell,and whirling away past the well-known stations; seeing the old southcountry-towns and hamlets sleeping in the warm light of the pure sun,which gave a yet ruddier colour to their tiled roofs, so different to thecold slates of the north. broods of pigeons hovered around these peakedquaint gables, slowly settling here and there, and ruffling their soft,shiny feathers, as if exposing every fibre to the delicious warmth. therewere few people about at the stations, it almost seemed as if they weretoo lazily content to wish to travel; none of the bustle and stir thatmargaret had noticed in her two journeys on the london and north-western line. later on in the year, this line of railway should be stirringand alive with rich pleasure-seekers; but as to the constant going to andfro of busy trades-people it would always be widely different from thenorthern lines. here a spectator or two stood lounging at nearly everystation, with his hands in his pockets, so absorbed in the simple act ofwatching, that it made the travellers wonder what he could find to dowhen the train whirled away, and only the blank of a railway, somesheds, and a distant field or two were left for him to gaze upon. the hotair danced over the golden stillness of the land, farm after farm was leftbehind, each reminding margaret of german idyls--of herman anddorothea--of evangeline. from this waking dream she was roused. itwas the place to leave the train and take the fly to helstone. and nowsharper feelings came shooting through her heart, whether pain orpleasure she could hardly tell. every mile was redolent of associations,which she would not have missed for the world, but each of whichmade her cry upon \"the days that are no more,\" with ineffable longing.
　　the last time she had passed along this road was when she had left it
　　with her father and mother--the day, the season, had been gloomy, andshe herself hopeless, but they were there with her. now she was alone,an orphan, and they, strangely, had gone away from her, and vanishedfrom the face of the earth. it hurt her to see the helstone road so floodedin the sun-light, and every turn and every familiar tree so precisely thesame in its summer glory as it had been in former years. nature felt nochange, and was ever young.
　　mr. bell knew something of what would be passing through her mind,and wisely and kindly held his tongue. they drove up to the lennardarms; half farm-house, half-inn, standing a little apart from the road, asmuch as to say, that the host did not so depend on the custom oftravellers, as to have to court it by any obtrusiveness; they, rather, mustseek him out. the house fronted the village green; and right before itstood an immemorial lime-tree benched all round, in some hiddenrecesses of whose leafy wealth hung the grim escutcheon of thelennards. the door of the inn stood wide open, but there was nohospitable hurry to receive the travellers. when the landlady did appear-andthey might have abstracted many an article first--she gave them akind welcome, almost as if they had been invited guests, and apologisedfor her coming having been so delayed, by saying, that it was hay-time,and the provisions for the men had to be sent a-field, and she had beentoo busy packing up the baskets to hear the noise of wheels over theroad, which, since they had left the highway, ran over soft short turf.
　　\"why, bless me!\" exclaimed she, as at the end of her apology, a glint ofsunlight showed her margaret\"s face, hitherto unobserved in that shadyparlour. \"it\"s miss hale, jenny,\" said she, running to the door, and callingto her daughter. \"come here, come directly, it\"s miss hale!\" and thenshe went up to margaret, and shook her hands with motherly fondness.
　　\"and how are you all? how\"s the vicar and miss dixon? the vicarabove all! god bless him! we\"ve never ceased to be sorry that he left.\"
　　margaret tried to speak and tell her of her father\"s death; of her mother\"sit was evident that mrs. purkis was aware, from her omission of hername. but she choked in the effort, and could only touch her deepmourning, and say the one word, \"papa.\"
　　\"surely, sir, it\"s never so!\" said mrs. purkis, turning to mr. bell forconfirmation of the sad suspicion that now entered her mind. \"there wasa gentleman here in the spring--it might have been as long ago as lastwinter--who told us a deal of mr. hale and miss margaret; and he saidmrs. hale was gone, poor lady. but never a word of the vicar\"s beingailing!\"
　　\"it is so, however,\" said mr. bell. \"he died quite suddenly, when on avisit to me at oxford. he was a good man, mrs. purkis, and there\"smany of us that might be thankful to have as calm an end as his. come
　　margaret, my dear! her father was my oldest friend, and she\"s my goddaughter,so i thought we would just come down together and see theold place; and i know of old you can give us comfortable rooms and acapital dinner. you don\"t remember me i see, but my name is bell, andonce or twice when the parsonage has been full, i\"ve slept here, andtasted your good ale.\"
　　\"to be sure; i ask your pardon; but you see i was taken up with misshale. let me show you to a room, miss margaret, where you can takeoff your bonnet, and wash your face. it\"s only this very morning iplunged some fresh-gathered roses head downward in the water-jug,for, thought i, perhaps some one will be coming, and there\"s nothing sosweet as spring-water scented by a musk rose or two. to think of thevicar being dead! well, to be sure, we must all die; only that gentlemansaid, he was quite picking up after his trouble about mrs. hale\"s death.\"
　　\"come down to me, mrs. purkis, after you have attended to miss hale. iwant to have a consultation with you about dinner.\"




第158章 CHAPTER XXI ONCE AND NOW (2)


　　the little casement window in margaret\"s bed-chamber was almostfilled up with rose and vine branches; but pushing them aside, andstretching a little out, she could see the tops of the parsonage chimneysabove the trees; and distinguish many a well-known line through theleaves.
　　\"aye!\" said mrs. purkis, smoothing down the bed, and despatchingjenny for an armful of lavender-scented towels, \"times is changed, miss;our new vicar has seven children, and is building a nursery ready formore, just out where the arbour and tool-house used to be in old times.
　　and he has had new grates put in, and a plate-glass window in thedrawing-room. he and his wife are stirring people, and have done a dealof good; at least they say it\"s doing good; if it were not, i should call itturning things upside down for very little purpose. the new vicar is ateetotaller, miss, and a magistrate, and his wife has a deal of receipts foreconomical cooking, and is for making bread without yeast; and theyboth talk so much, and both at a time, that they knock one down as itwere, and it\"s not till they\"re gone, and one\"s a little at peace, that onecan think that there were things one might have said on one\"s own sideof the question. he\"ll be after the men\"s cans in the hay-field, andpeeping in; and then there\"ll be an ado because it\"s not ginger beer, but ican\"t help it. my mother and my grandmother before me sent good maltliquor to haymakers; and took salts and senna when anything ailedthem; and i must e\"en go on in their ways, though mrs. hepworth doeswant to give me comfits instead of medicine, which, as she says, is adeal pleasanter, only i\"ve no faith in it. but i must go, miss, though i\"mwanting to hear many a thing; i\"ll come back to you before long.
　　mr. bell had strawberries and cream, a loaf of brown bread, and a jug of
　　milk, (together with a stilton cheese and a bottle of port for his ownprivate refreshment,) ready for margaret on her coming down stairs;and after this rustic luncheon they set out to walk, hardly knowing inwhat direction to turn, so many old familiar inducements were there ineach.
　　\"shall we go past the vicarage?\" asked mr. bell.
　　\"no, not yet. we will go this way, and make a round so as to come backby it,\" replied margaret.
　　here and there old trees had been felled the autumn before; or asquatter\"s roughly-built and decaying cottage had disappeared. margaretmissed them each and all, and grieved over them like old friends. theycame past the spot where she and mr. lennox had sketched. the white,lightning-scarred trunk of the venerable beech, among whose roots theyhad sate down was there no more; the old man, the inhabitant of theruinous cottage, was dead; the cottage had been pulled down, and a newone, tidy and respectable, had been built in its stead. there was a smallgarden on the place where the beech-tree had been.
　　\"i did not think i had been so old,\" said margaret after a pause of silence;and she turned away sighing.
　　\"yes!\" said mr. bell. \"it is the first changes among familiar things thatmake such a mystery of time to the young, afterwards we lose the senseof the mysterious. i take changes in all i see as a matter of course. theinstability of all human things is familiar to me, to you it is new andoppressive.\"
　　\"let us go on to see little susan,\" said margaret, drawing her companionup a grassy road-way, leading under the shadow of a forest glade.
　　\"with all my heart, though i have not an idea who little susan may be.
　　but i have a kindness for all susans, for simple susan\"s sake.\"
　　\"my little susan was disappointed when i left without wishing hergoodbye; and it has been on my conscience ever since, that i gave herpain which a little more exertion on my part might have prevented. butit is a long way. are you sure you will not be tired?\"
　　\"quite sure. that is, if you don\"t walk so fast. you see, here there are noviews that can give one an excuse for stopping to take breath. youwould think it romantic to be walking with a person \"fat and scant o\"
　　breath\" if i were hamlet, prince of denmark. have compassion on myinfirmities for his sake.\"
　　\"i will walk slower for your own sake. i like you twenty times betterthan hamlet.\"
　　\"on the principle that a living ass is better than a dead lion?\"
　　\"perhaps so. i don\"t analyse my feelings.\"
　　\"i am content to take your liking me, without examining too curiouslyinto the materials it is made of. only we need not walk at a snail\"s\"
　　pace.\"
　　\"very well. walk at your own pace, and i will follow. or stop still andmeditate, like the hamlet you compare yourself to, if i go too fast.\"
　　\"thank you. but as my mother has not murdered my father, andafterwards married my uncle, i shouldn\"t know what to think about,unless it were balancing the chances of our having a well-cooked dinneror not. what do you think?\"
　　\"i am in good hopes. she used to be considered a famous cook as far ashelstone opinion went.\"
　　\"but have you considered the distraction of mind produced by all thishaymaking?\"
　　margaret felt all mr. bell\"s kindness in trying to make cheerful talkabout nothing, to endeavour to prevent her from thinking too curiouslyabout the past. but she would rather have gone over these dear-lovedwalks in silence, if indeed she were not ungrateful enough to wish thatshe might have been alone.
　　they reached the cottage where susan\"s widowed mother lived. susanwas not there. she was gone to the parochial school. margaret wasdisappointed, and the poor woman saw it, and began to make a kind ofapology.
　　\"oh! it is quite right,\" said margaret. \"i am very glad to hear it. i mighthave thought of it. only she used to stop at home with you.\"
　　\"yes, she did; and i miss her sadly. i used to teach her what little i knewat nights. it were not much to be sure. but she were getting such ahandy girl, that i miss her sore. but she\"s a deal above me in learningnow.\" and the mother sighed.
　　\"i\"m all wrong,\" growled mr. bell. \"don\"t mind what i say. i\"m a hundredyears behind the world. but i should say, that the child was getting abetter and simpler, and more natural education stopping at home, andhelping her mother, and learning to read a chapter in the newtestament every night by her side, than from all the schooling under thesun.\"
　　margaret did not want to encourage him to go on by replying to him,and so prolonging the discussion before the mother. so she turned toher and asked,\"how is old betty barnes?\"




第159章 CHAPTER XXI ONCE AND NOW (3)


　　\"i don\"t know,\" said the woman rather shortly. \"we\"se not friends.\"
　　\"why not?\" asked margaret, who had formerly been the peacemaker ofthe village.
　　\"she stole my cat.\"
　　\"did she know it was yours?\"
　　\"i don\"t know. i reckon not.\"
　　\"well! could not you get it back again when you told her it was yours?\"
　　\"no! for she\"d burnt it.\"
　　\"burnt it!\" exclaimed both margaret and mr. bell.
　　\"roasted it!\" explained the woman.
　　it was no explanation. by dint of questioning, margaret extracted fromher the horrible fact that betty barnes, having been induced by a gypsyfortune-teller to lend the latter her husband\"s sunday clothes, onpromise of having them faithfully returned on the saturday night beforegoodman barnes should have missed them, became alarmed by theirnon-appearance, and her consequent dread of her husband\"s anger, andas, according to one of the savage country superstitions, the cries of acat, in the agonies of being boiled or roasted alive, compelled (as itwere) the powers of darkness to fulfil the wishes of the executioner,resort had been had to the charm. the poor woman evidently believedin its efficacy; her only feeling was indignation that her cat had beenchosen out from all others for a sacrifice. margaret listened in horror;and endeavoured in vain to enlighten the woman\"s mind; but she wasobliged to give it up in despair. step by step she got the woman to admitcertain facts, of which the logical connexion and sequence was perfectlyclear to margaret; but at the end, the bewildered woman simplyrepeated her first assertion, namely, that \"it were very cruel for sure, andshe should not like to do it; but that there were nothing like it for givinga person what they wished for; she had heard it all her life; but it werevery cruel for all that.\" margaret gave it up in despair, and walked awaysick at heart.
　　\"you are a good girl not to triumph over me,\" said mr. bell.
　　\"how? what do you mean?\"
　　\"i own, i am wrong about schooling. anything rather than have thatchild brought up in such practical paganism.\"
　　\"oh! i remember. poor little susan! i must go and see her; would youmind calling at the school?\"
　　\"not a bit. i am curious to see something of the teaching she is toreceive.\"
　　they did not speak much more, but thridded their way through many abosky dell, whose soft green influence could not charm away the shockand the pain in margaret\"s heart, caused by the recital of such cruelty; arecital too, the manner of which betrayed such utter want ofimagination, and therefore of any sympathy with the suffering animal.
　　the buzz of voices, like the murmur of a hive of busy human bees,made itself heard as soon as they emerged from the forest on the moreopen village-green on which the school was situated. the door waswide open, and they entered. a brisk lady in black, here, there, andeverywhere, perceived them, and bade them welcome with somewhat ofthe hostess-air which, margaret remembered, her mother was wont to
　　assume, only in a more soft and languid manner, when any rare visitorsstrayed in to inspect the school. she knew at once it was the presentvicar\"s wife, her mother\"s successor; and she would have drawn backfrom the interview had it been possible; but in an instant she hadconquered this feeling, and modestly advanced, meeting many a brightglance of recognition, and hearing many a half-suppressed murmur of\"it\"s miss hale.\" the vicar\"s lady heard the name, and her manner atonce became more kindly. margaret wished she could have helpedfeeling that it also became more patronising. the lady held out a handto mr. bell, with-\"
　　your father, i presume, miss hale. i see it by the likeness. i am sure iam very glad to see you, sir, and so will the vicar be.\"
　　margaret explained that it was not her father, and stammered out thefact of his death; wondering all the time how mr. hale could have bornecoming to revisit helstone, if it had been as the vicar\"s lady supposed.
　　she did not hear what mrs. hepworth was saying, and left it to mr. bellto reply, looking round, meanwhile, for her old acquaintances.
　　\"ah! i see you would like to take a class, miss hale. i know it bymyself. first class stand up for a parsing lesson with miss hale.\"
　　poor margaret, whose visit was sentimental, not in any degreeinspective, felt herself taken in; but as in some way bringing her incontact with little eager faces, once well-known, and who had receivedthe solemn rite of baptism from her father, she sate down, half losingherself in tracing out the changing features of the girls, and holdingsusan\"s hand for a minute or two, unobserved by all, while the firstclass sought for their books, and the vicar\"s lady went as near as a ladycould towards holding mr. bell by the button, while she explained thephonetic system to him, and gave him a conversation she had had withthe inspector about it.
　　margaret bent over her book, and seeing nothing but that--hearing thebuzz of children\"s voices, old times rose up, and she thought of them,and her eyes filled with tears, till all at once there was a pause--one ofthe girls was stumbling over the apparently simple word \"a,\" uncertainwhat to call it.
　　\"a, an indefinite article,\" said margaret, mildly.
　　\"i beg your pardon,\" said the vicar\"s wife, all eyes and ears; \"but we aretaught by mr. milsome to call \"a\" an--who can remember?\"
　　\"an adjective absolute,\" said half-a-dozen voices at once. and margaretsate abashed. the children knew more than she did. mr. bell turnedaway, and smiled.
　　margaret spoke no more during the lesson. but after it was over, shewent quietly round to one or two old favourites, and talked to them alittle. they were growing out of children into great girls; passing out of
　　her recollection in their rapid development, as she, by her three years\"
　　absence, was vanishing from theirs. still she was glad to have seenthem all again, though a tinge of sadness mixed itself with her pleasure.
　　when school was over for the day, it was yet early in the summerafternoon; and mrs. hepworth proposed to margaret that she and mr.
下+书+网



第160章 CHAPTER XXI ONCE AND NOW (4)


　　bell should accompany her to the parsonage, and see the--the word\"improvements\" had half slipped out of her mouth, but she substitutedthe more cautious term \"alterations\" which the present vicar wasmaking. margaret did not care a straw about seeing the alterations,which jarred upon her fond recollection of what her home had been; butshe longed to see the old place once more, even though she shiveredaway from the pain which she knew she should feel.
　　the parsonage was so altered, both inside and out, that the real pain wasless than she had anticipated. it was not like the same place. thegarden, the grass-plat, formerly so daintily trim that even a stray rose-leaf seemed like a fleck on its exquisite arrangement and propriety, wasstrewed with children\"s things; a bag of marbles here, a hoop there; astraw-hat forced down upon a rose-tree as on a peg, to the destruction ofa long beautiful tender branch laden with flowers, which in former dayswould have been trained up tenderly, as if beloved. the little squarematted hall was equally filled with signs of merry healthy roughchildhood.
　　\"ah!\" said mrs. hepworth, \"you must excuse this untidiness, miss hale.
　　when the nursery is finished, i shall insist upon a little order. we arebuilding a nursery out of your room, i believe. how did you manage,miss hale, without a nursery?\"
　　\"we were but two,\" said margaret. \"you have many children, i presume?\"
　　\"seven. look here! we are throwing out a window to the road on thisside. mr. hepworth is spending an immense deal of money on thishouse; but really it was scarcely habitable when we came--for so large afamily as ours i mean, of course.\" every room in the house waschanged, besides the one of which mrs. hepworth spoke, which hadbeen mr. hale\"s study formerly; and where the green gloom anddelicious quiet of the place had conduced, as he had said, to a habit ofmeditation, but, perhaps, in some degree to the formation of a charactermore fitted for thought than action. the new window gave a view of theroad, and had many advantages, as mrs. hepworth pointed out. from itthe wandering sheep of her husband\"s flock might be seen, whostraggled to the tempting beer-house, unobserved as they might hope,but not unobserved in reality; for the active vicar kept his eye on theroad, even during the composition of his most orthodox sermons, andhad a hat and stick hanging ready at hand to seize, before sallying outafter his parishioners, who had need of quick legs if they could take
　　refuge in the \"jolly forester\" before the teetotal vicar had arrested them.
　　the whole family were quick, brisk, loud-talking, kind-hearted, and nottroubled with much delicacy of perception. margaret feared that mrs.
　　hepworth would find out that mr. bell was playing upon her, in theadmiration he thought fit to express for everything that especially gratedon his taste. but no! she took it all literally, and with such good faith,that margaret could not help remonstrating with him as they walkedslowly away from the parsonage back to their inn.
　　\"don\"t scold, margaret. it was all because of you. if she had not shownyou every change with such evident exultation in their superior sense, inperceiving what an improvement this and that would be, i could havebehaved well. but if you must go on preaching, keep it till after dinner,when it will send me to sleep, and help my digestion.\"
　　they were both of them tired, and margaret herself so much so, that shewas unwilling to go out as she had proposed to do, and have anotherramble among the woods and fields so close to the home of herchildhood. and, somehow, this visit to helstone had not been all--hadnot been exactly what she had expected. there was change everywhere;slight, yet pervading all. households were changed by absence, ordeath, or marriage, or the natural mutations brought by days and monthsand years, which carry us on imperceptibly from childhood to youth,and thence through manhood to age, whence we drop like fruit, fullyripe, into the quiet mother earth. places were changed--a tree gone here,a bough there, bringing in a long ray of light where no light was before-aroad was trimmed and narrowed, and the green straggling pathway byits side enclosed and cultivated. a great improvement it was called; butmargaret sighed over the old picturesqueness, the old gloom, and thegrassy wayside of former days. she sate by the window on the littlesettle, sadly gazing out upon the gathering shades of night, whichharmonised well with her pensive thought. mr. bell slept soundly, afterhis unusual exercise through the day. at last he was roused by theentrance of the tea-tray, brought in by a flushed-looking country-girl,who had evidently been finding some variety from her usual occupationof waiter, in assisting this day in the hayfield.
　　\"hallo! who\"s there! where are we? who\"s that,--margaret? oh, now iremember all. i could not imagine what woman was sitting there in sucha doleful attitude, with her hands clasped straight out upon her knees,and her face looking so steadfastly before her. what were you lookingat?\" asked mr. bell, coming to the window, and standing behindmargaret.
　　\"nothing,\" said she, rising up quickly, and speaking as cheerfully as shecould at a moment\"s notice.
　　\"nothing indeed! a bleak back-ground of trees, some white linen hung
　　out on the sweet-briar hedge, and a great waft of damp air. shut thewindow, and come in and make tea.\"
　　margaret was silent for some time. she played with her teaspoon, anddid not attend particularly to what mr. bell said. he contradicted her,and she took the same sort of smiling notice of his opinion as if he hadagreed with her. then she sighed, and putting down her spoon, shebegan, apropos of nothing at all, and in the high-pitched voice whichusually shows that the speaker has been thinking for some time on thesubject that they wish to introduce--\"mr. bell, you remember what wewere saying about frederick last night, don\"t you?\"
　　\"last night. where was i? oh, i remember! why it seems a week ago.
　　yes, to be sure, i recollect we talked about him, poor fellow.\"
　　\"yes--and do you not remember that mr. lennox spoke about his havingbeen in england about the time of dear mamma\"s death?\" askedmargaret, her voice now lower than usual.
　　\"i recollect. i hadn\"t heard of it before.\"
www.xiabook.com/



第161章 CHAPTER XXI ONCE AND NOW (5)


　　\"and i thought--i always thought that papa had told you about it.\"
　　\"no! he never did. but what about it, margaret?\"
　　\"i want to tell you of something i did that was very wrong, about thattime,\" said margaret, suddenly looking up at him with her clear honesteyes. \"i told a lie;\" and her face became scarlet.
　　\"true, that was bad i own; not but what i have told a pretty roundnumber in my life, not all in downright words, as i suppose you did, butin actions, or in some shabby circumlocutory way, leading people eitherto disbelieve the truth, or believe a falsehood. you know who is thefather of lies, margaret? well! a great number of folk, thinkingthemselves very good, have odd sorts of connexion with lies, left-handmarriages, and second cousins-once-removed. the tainting blood offalsehood runs through us all. i should have guessed you as far from itas most people. what! crying, child? nay, now we\"ll not talk of it, if itends in this way. i dare say you have been sorry for it, and that youwon\"t do it again, and it\"s long ago now, and in short i want you to bevery cheerful, and not very sad, this evening.\"
　　margaret wiped her eyes, and tried to talk about something else, butsuddenly she burst out afresh.
　　\"please, mr. bell, let me tell you about it--you could perhaps help me alittle; no, not help me, but if you knew the truth, perhaps you could putme to rights--that is not it, after all,\" said she, in despair at not being ableto express herself more exactly as she wished.
　　mr. bell\"s whole manner changed. \"tell me all about it, child,\" said he.
　　\"it\"s a long story; but when fred came, mamma was very ill, and i wasundone with anxiety, and afraid, too, that i might have drawn him intodanger; and we had an alarm just after her death, for dixon met some
　　one in milton--a man called leonards--who had known fred, and whoseemed to owe him a grudge, or at any rate to be tempted by therecollection of the reward offered for hisapprehension; and with thisnew fright, i thought i had better hurry off fred to london, where, asyou would understand from what we said the other night, he was to goto consult mr. lennox as to his chances if he stood the trial. so we--thatis, he and i,--went to the railway station; it was one evening, and it wasjust getting rather dusk, but still light enough to recognise and berecognised, and we were too early, and went out to walk in a field justclose by; i was always in a panic about this leonards, who was, i knew,somewhere in the neighbourhood; and then, when we were in the field,the low red sunlight just in my face, some one came by on horseback inthe road just below the field-style by which we stood. i saw him look atme, but i did not know who it was at first, the sun was so in my eyes,but in an instant the dazzle went off, and i saw it was mr. thornton, andwe bowed,\"---\"
　　and he saw frederick of course,\" said mr. bell, helping her on with herstory, as he thought.
　　\"yes; and then at the station a man came up--tipsy and reeling--and hetried to collar fred, and over-balanced himself as fred wrenchedhimself away, and fell over the edge of the platform; not far, not deep;not above three feet; but oh! mr. bell, somehow that fall killed him!\"
　　\"how awkward. it was this leonards, i suppose. and how did fred getoff?\"
　　\"oh! he went off immediately after the fall, which we never thoughtcould have done the poor fellow any harm, it seemed so slight aninjury.\"
　　\"then he did not die directly?\"
　　\"no! not for two or three days. and then--oh, mr. bell! now comes thebad part,\" said she, nervously twining her fingers together. \"a policeinspector came and taxed me with having been the companion of theyoung man, whose push or blow had occasioned leonards\" death; thatwas a false accusation, you know, but we had not heard that fred hadsailed, he might still be in london and liable to be arrested on this falsecharge, and his identity with the lieutenant hale, accused of causingthat mutiny, discovered, he might be shot; all this flashed through mymind, and i said it was not me. i was not at the railway station thatnight. i knew nothing about it. i had no conscience or thought but tosave frederick.\"
　　\"i say it was right. i should have done the same. you forgot yourself inthought for another. i hope i should have done the same.\"
　　\"no, you would not. it was wrong, disobedient, faithless. at that verytime fred was safely out of england, and in my blindness i forgot that
　　there was another witness who could testify to my being there.\"
　　\"who?\"
　　\"mr. thornton. you know he had seen me close to the station; we hadbowed to each other.\"
　　\"well! he would know nothing of this riot about the drunken fellow\"sdeath. i suppose the inquiry never came to anything.\"
　　\"no! the proceedings they had begun to talk about on the inquest werestopped. mr. thornton did know all about it. he was a magistrate, andhe found out that it was not the fall that had caused the death. but notbefore he knew what i had said. oh, mr. bell!\" she suddenly coveredher face with her hands, as if wishing to hide herself from the presenceof the recollection.
　　\"did you have any explanation with him? did you ever tell him thestrong, instinctive motive?\"
　　\"the instinctive want of faith, and clutching at a sin to keep myself fromsinking,\" said she bitterly. \"no! how could i? he knew nothing offrederick. to put myself to rights in his good opinion, was i to tell himof the secrets of our family, involving, as they seemed to do, thechances of poor frederick\"s entire exculpation? fred\"s last words hadbeen to enjoin me to keep his visit a secret from all. you see, papanever told, even you. no! i could bear the shame--i thought i could atleast. i did bear it. mr. thornton has never respected me since.\"
　　\"he respects you, i am sure,\" said mr. bell. \"to be sure, it accounts alittle for----. but he always speaks of you with regard and esteem,though now i understand certain reservations in his manner.\"
　　margaret did not speak; did not attend to what mr. bell went on to say;lost all sense of it. by-and-by she said:
　　\"will you tell me what you refer to about \"reservations\" in his manner ofspeaking of me?\"
　　\"oh! simply he has annoyed me by not joining in my praises of you.
　　like an old fool, i thought that every one would have the same opinionsas i had; and he evidently could not agree with me. i was puzzled at thetime. but he must be perplexed, if the affair has never been in the leastexplained. there was first your walking out with a young man in thedark--\"
&下&书_ 网



第162章 CHAPTER XXI ONCE AND NOW (6)


　　\"but it was my brother!\" said margaret, surprised.
　　\"true. but how was he to know that?\"
　　\"i don\"t know. i never thought of anything of that kind,\" said margaret,reddening, and looking hurt and offended.
　　\"and perhaps he never would, but for the lie,--which, under thecircumstances, i maintain, was necessary.\"
　　\"it was not. i know it now. i bitterly repent it.\"
　　there was a long pause of silence. margaret was the first to speak.
　　\"i am not likely ever to see mr. thornton again,\"--and there she stopped.
　　\"there are many things more unlikely, i should say,\" replied mr. bell.
　　\"but i believe i never shall. still, somehow one does not like to havesunk so low in--in a friend\"s opinion as i have done in his.\" her eyeswere full of tears, but her voice was steady, and mr. bell was notlooking at her. \"and now that frederick has given up all hope, andalmost all wish of ever clearing himself, and returning to england, itwould be only doing myself justice to have all this explained. if youplease, and if you can, if there is a good opportunity, (don\"t force anexplanation upon him, pray,) but if you can, will you tell him the wholecircumstances, and tell him also that i gave you leave to do so, becausei felt that for papa\"s sake i should not like to lose his respect, though wemay never be likely to meet again?\"
　　\"certainly. i think he ought to know. i do not like you to rest even underthe shadow of an impropriety; he would not know what to think ofseeing you alone with a young man.\"
　　\"as for that,\" said margaret, rather haughtily, \"i hold it is \"honi soit quimal y pense.\" yet still i should choose to have it explained, if anynatural opportunity for easy explanation occurs. but it is not to clearmyself of any suspicion of improper conduct that i wish to have himtold--if i thought that he had suspected me, i should not care for hisgood opinion--no! it is that he may learn how i was tempted, and how ifell into the snare; why i told that falsehood, in short.\"
　　\"which i don\"t blame you for. it is no partiality of mine, i assure you.\"
　　\"what other people may think of the rightness or wrongness is nothingin comparison to my own deep knowledge, my innate conviction that itwas wrong. but we will not talk of that any more, if you please. it isdone--my sin is sinned. i have now to put it behind me, and be truthfulfor evermore, if i can.\"
　　\"very well. if you like to be uncomfortable and morbid, be so. i alwayskeep my conscience as tight shut up as a jack-in-a-box, for when itjumps into existence it surprises me by its size. so i coax it down again,as the fisherman coaxed the genie. \"wonderful,\" say i, \"to think thatyou have been concealed so long, and in so small a compass, that ireally did not know of your existence. pray, sir, instead of growinglarger and larger every instant, and bewildering me with your mistyoutlines, would you once more compress yourself into your formerdimensions?\" and when i\"ve got him down, don\"t i clap the seal on thevase, and take good care how i open it again, and how i go againstsolomon, wisest of men, who confined him there.\"
　　but it was no smiling matter to margaret. she hardly attended to whatmr. bell was saying. her thoughts ran upon the idea, beforeentertained, but which now had assumed the strength of a conviction,
　　that mr. thornton no longer held his former good opinion of her--thathe was disappointed in her. she did not feel as if any explanation couldever reinstate her--not in his love, for that and any return on her part shehad resolved never to dwell upon, and she kept rigidly to her resolution-butin the respect and high regard which she had hoped would have evermade him willing, in the spirit of gerald griffin\"s beautiful lines,\"to turn and look back when thou hearestthe sound of my name.\"
　　she kept choking and swallowing all the time that she thought about it.
www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ下 /书 网



第163章 CHAPTER XXI ONCE AND NOW (7)


　　she tried to comfort herself with the idea, that what he imagined her tobe, did not alter the fact of what she was. but it was a truism, aphantom, and broke down under the weight of her regret. she hadtwenty questions on the tip of her tongue to ask mr. bell, but not one ofthem did she utter. mr. bell thought thatshe was tired, and sent her earlyto her room, where she sate long hours by the open window, gazing outon the purple dome above, where the stars arose, and twinkled anddisappeared behind the great umbrageous trees before she went to bed.
　　all night long too, there burnt a little light on earth; a candle in her oldbedroom, which was the nursery with the present inhabitants of theparsonage, until the new one was built. a sense of change, of individualnothingness, of perplexity and disappointment, over-powered margaret.
　　nothing had been the same; and this slight, all-pervading instability,had given her greater pain than if all had been too entirely changed forher to recognise it.
　　\"i begin to understand now what heaven must be--and, oh! the grandeurand repose of the words--\"the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.\"everlasting! \"from everlasting to everlasting, thou art god.\" that skyabove me looks as though it could not change, and yet it will. i am sotired--so tired of being whirled on through all these phases of my life, inwhich nothing abides by me, no creature, no place; it is like the circle inwhich the victims of earthly passion eddy continually. i am in the moodin which women of another religion take the veil. i seek heavenlysteadfastness in earthly monotony. if i were a roman catholic andcould deaden my heart, stun it with some great blow, i might become anun. but i should pine after my kind; no, not my kind, for love for myspecies could never fill my heart to the utter exclusion of love forindividuals. perhaps it ought to be so, perhaps not; i cannot decide tonight.\"
　　wearily she went to bed, wearily she arose in four or five hours\" time.
　　but with the morning came hope, and a brighter view of things.
　　\"after all it is right,\" said she, hearing the voices of children at playwhile she was dressing. \"if the world stood still, it would retrograde andbecome corrupt, if that is not irish. looking out of myself, and my own
　　painful sense of change, the progress all around me is right andnecessary. i must not think so much of how circumstances affect memyself, but how they affect others, if i wish to have a right judgment, ora hopeful trustful heart.\" and with a smile ready in her eyes to quiverdown to her lips, she went into the parlour and greeted mr. bell.
　　\"ah, missy! you were up late last night, and so you\"re late this morning.
　　now i\"ve got a little piece of news for you. what do you think of aninvitation to dinner? a morning call, literally in the dewy morning.
　　why, i\"ve had the vicar here already, on his way to the school. howmuch the desire of giving our hostess a teetotal lecture for the benefit ofthe haymakers, had to do with his earliness, i don\"t know; but here hewas, when i came down just before nine; and we are asked to dine thereto-day.\"
　　\"but edith expects me back--i cannot go,\" said margaret, thankful tohave so good an excuse.
　　\"yes! i know; so i told him. i thought you would not want to go. still itis open, if you would like it.\"
　　\"oh, no!\" said margaret. \"let us keep to our plan. let us start at twelve.
　　it is very good and kind of them; but indeed i could not go.\"
　　\"very well. don\"t fidget yourself, and i\"ll arrange it all.\"
　　before they left margaret stole round to the back of the vicaragegarden, and gathered a little straggling piece of honeysuckle. she wouldnot take a flower the day before, for fear of being observed, and hermotives and feelings commented upon. but as she returned across thecommon, the place was reinvested with the old enchanting atmosphere.
　　the common sounds of life were more musical there than anywhereelse in the whole world, the light more golden, the life more tranquiland full of dreamy delight. as margaret remembered her feelingsyesterday, she said to herself:
　　\"and i too change perpetually--now this, now that--now disappointedand peevish because all is not exactly as i had pictured it, and nowsuddenly discovering that the reality is far more beautiful than i hadimagined it. oh, helstone! i shall never love any place like you.
　　a few days afterwards, she had found her level, and decided that shewas very glad to have been there, and that she had seen it again, andthat to her it would always be the prettiest spot in the world, but that itwas so full of associations with former days, and especially with herfather and mother, that if it were all to come over again, she shouldshrink back from such another visit as that which she had paid with mr.
　　bell.
  www.7wenxue.com　  



第164章 CHAPTER XXII SOMETHING WANTING (1)


　　\"experience, like a pale musician, holdsa dulcimer of patience in his hand;whence harmonies we cannot understand,of god\"s will in his worlds, the strain unfoldsin sad, perplexed minors.\"
　　mrs. browning.
　　about this time dixon returned from milton, and assumed her post asmargaret\"s maid. she brought endless pieces of milton gossip: howmartha had gone to live with miss thornton, on the latter\"s marriage;with an account of the bridesmaids, dresses and breakfasts, at thatinteresting ceremony; how people thought that mr. thornton had madetoo grand a wedding of it, considering he had lost a deal by the strike,and had had to pay so much for the failure of his contracts; how littlemoney articles of furniture--long cherished by dixon--had fetched at thesale, which was a shame considering how rich folks were at milton;how mrs. thornton had come one day and got two or three goodbargains, and mr. thornton had come the next, and in his desire toobtain one or two things, had bid against himself, much to theenjoyment of the bystanders, so as dixon observed, that made thingseven; if mrs. thornton paid too little, mr. thornton paid too much. mr.
　　bell had sent all sorts of orders about the books; there was nounderstanding him, he was so particular; if he had come himself itwould have been all right, but letters always were and always will bemore puzzling than they are worth. dixon had not much to tell about thehigginses. her memory had an aristocratic bias, and was verytreacherous whenever she tried to recall any circumstance connectedwith those below her in life. nicholas was very well she believed. hehad been several times at the house asking for news of miss margaret-theonly person who ever did ask, except once mr. thornton. andmary? oh! of course she was very well, a great, stout, slatternly thing!
　　she did hear, or perhaps it was only a dream of hers, though it would bestrange if she had dreamt of such people as the higginses, that mary
　　had gone to work at mr. thornton\"s mill, because her father wished herto know how to cook; but what nonsense that could mean she didn\"tknow. margaret rather agreed with her that the story was incoherentenough to be like a dream. still it was pleasant to have some one nowwith whom she could talk of milton, and milton people. dixon was notover-fond of the subject, rather wishing to leave that part of her life inshadow. she liked much more to dwell upon speeches of mr. bell\"s,which had suggested an idea to her of what was really his intention-makingmargaret his heiress. but her young lady gave her noencouragement, nor in any way gratified her insinuating enquiries,however disguised in the form of suspicions or assertions.
　　all this time, margaret had a strange undefined longing to hear that mr.
　　bell had gone to pay one of his business visits to milton; for it had beenwell understood between them, at the time of their conversation athelstone, that the explanation she had desired should only be given tomr. thornton by word of mouth, and even in that manner should be innowise forced upon him. mr. bell was no great correspondent, but hewrote from time to time long or short letters, as the humour took him,and although margaret was not conscious of any definite hope, onreceiving them, yet she always put away his notes with a little feeling ofdisappointment. he was not going to milton; he said nothing about it atany rate. well! she must be patient. sooner or later the mists would becleared away. mr. bell\"s letters were hardly like his usual self; theywere short, and complaining, with every now and then a little touch ofbitterness that was unusual. he did not look forward to the future; herather seemed to regret the past, and be weary of the present. margaretfancied that he could not be well; but in answer to some enquiry of hersas to his health, he sent her a short note, saying there was an old-fashioned complaint called the spleen; that he was suffering from that,and it was for her to decide if it was more mental or physical; but thathe should like to indulge himself in grumbling, without being obliged tosend a bulletin every time.
　　in consequence of this note, margaret made no more enquiries about hishealth. one day edith let out accidentally a fragment of a conversationwhich she had had with mr. bell, when he was last in london, whichpossessed margaret with the idea that he had some notion of taking herto pay a visit to her brother and new sister-in-law, at cadiz, in theautumn. she questioned and cross-questioned edith, till the latter wasweary, and declared that there was nothing more to remember; all hehad said was that he half-thought he should go, and hear for himselfwhat frederick had to say about the mutiny; and that it would be a goodopportunity for margaret to become acquainted with her new sister-inlaw;that he always went somewhere during the long vacation, and did
　　not see why he should not go to spain as well as anywhere else. thatwas all. edith hoped margaret did not want to leave them, that she wasso anxious about all this. and then, having nothing else particular to do,she cried, and said that she knew she cared much more for margaretthan margaret did for her. margaret comforted her as well as she could,but she could hardly explain to her how this idea of spain, merechateau en espagne as it might be, charmed and delighted her. edithwas in the mood to think that any pleasure enjoyed away from her was atacit affront, or at best a proof of indifference. so margaret had to keepher pleasure to herself, and could only let it escape by the safety-valveof asking dixon, when she dressed for dinner, if she would not like tosee master frederick and his new wife very much indeed?




第165章 CHAPTER XXII SOMETHING WANTING (2)


　　\"she\"s a papist, miss, isn\"t she?\"
　　\"i believe--oh yes, certainly!\" said margaret, a little damped for aninstant at this recollection.
　　\"and they live in a popish country?\"
　　\"yes.\"
　　\"then i\"m afraid i must say, that my soul is dearer to me than evenmaster frederick, his own dear self. i should be in a perpetual terror,miss, lest i should be converted.\"
　　\"oh\" said margaret, \"i do not know that i am going; and if i go, i am notsuch a fine lady as to be unable to travel without you. no! dear olddixon, you shall have a long holiday, if we go. but i\"m afraid it is along \"if.\"\"
　　now dixon did not like this speech. in the first place, she did not likemargaret\"s trick of calling her \"dear old dixon\" whenever she wasparticularly demonstrative. she knew that miss hale was apt to call allpeople that she liked \"old,\" as a sort of term of endearment; but dixonalways winced away from the application of the word to herself, who,being not much past fifty, was, she thought, in the very prime of life.
　　secondly, she did not like being so easily taken at her word; she had,with all her terror, a lurking curiosity about spain, the inquisition, andpopish mysteries. so, after clearing her throat, as if to show herwillingness to do away with difficulties, she asked miss hale, whethershe thought if she took care never to see a priest, or enter into one oftheir churches, there would be so very much danger of her beingconverted? master frederick, to be sure, had gone over unaccountable.
　　\"i fancy it was love that first predisposed him to conversion,\" saidmargaret, sighing.
　　\"indeed, miss!\" said dixon; \"well! i can preserve myself from priests,and from churches; but love steals in unawares! i think it\"s as well ishould not go.\"
　　margaret was afraid of letting her mind run too much upon this spanish
　　plan. but it took off her thoughts from too impatiently dwelling uponher desire to have all explained to mr. thornton. mr. bell appeared forthe present to be stationary at oxford, and to have no immediatepurpose of going to milton, and some secret restraint seemed to hangover margaret, and prevent her from even asking, or alluding again toany probability of such a visit on his part. nor did she feel at liberty toname what edith had told her of the idea he had entertained,--it mightbe but for five minutes,--of going to spain. he had never named it athelstone, during all that sunny day of leisure; it was very probably butthe fancy of a moment,--but if it were true, what a bright outlet it wouldbe from the monotony of her present life, which was beginning to fallupon her.
　　one of the great pleasures of margaret\"s life at this time, was in edith\"sboy. he was the pride and plaything of both father and mother, as longas he was good; but he had a strong will of his own, and as soon as heburst out into one of his stormy passions, edith would throw herselfback in despair and fatigue, and sigh out, \"oh dear, what shall i do withhim! do, margaret, please ring the bell for hanley.\"
　　but margaret almost liked him better in these manifestations ofcharacter than in his good blue-sashed moods. she would carry him offinto a room, where they two alone battled it out; she with a firm powerwhich subdued him into peace, while every sudden charm and wile shepossessed, was exerted on the side of right, until he would rub his littlehot and tear-smeared face all over hers, kissing and caressing till heoften fell asleep in her arms or on her shoulder. those were margaret\"ssweetest moments. they gave her a taste of the feeling that she believedwould be denied to her for ever.
　　mr. henry lennox added a new and not disagreeable element to thecourse of the household life by his frequent presence. margaret thoughthim colder, if more brilliant than formerly; but there were strongintellectual tastes, and much and varied knowledge, which gave flavourto the otherwise rather insipid conversation. margaret saw glimpses inhim of a slight contempt for his brother and sister-in-law, and for theirmode of life, which he seemed to consider as frivolous and purposeless.
　　he once or twice spoke to his brother, in margaret\"s presence, in apretty sharp tone of enquiry, as to whether he meant entirely torelinquish his profession; and on captain lennox\"s reply, that he hadquite enough to live upon, she had seen mr. lennox\"s curl of the lip ashe said, \"and is that all you live for?\"
　　but the brothers were much attached to each other, in the way that anytwo persons are, when the one is cleverer and always leads the other,and this last is patiently content to be led. mr. lennox was pushing onin his profession; cultivating, with profound calculation, all those
　　connections that might eventually be of service to him; keen-sighted,far-seeing, intelligent, sarcastic, and proud. since the one longconversation relating to frederick\"s affairs, which she had with him thefirst evening in mr. bell\"s presence, she had had no great intercoursewith him, further than that which arose out of their close relations withthe same household. but this was enough to wear off the shyness on herside, and any symptoms of mortified pride and vanity on his. they metcontinually, of course, but she thought that he rather avoided beingalone with her; she fancied that he, as well as she, perceived that theyhad drifted strangely apart from their former anchorage, side by side, inmany of their opinions, and all their tastes.
　　and yet, when he had spoken unusually well, or with remarkableepigrammatic point, she felt that his eye sought the expression of hercountenance first of all, if but for an instant; and that, in the familyintercourse which constantly threw them together, her opinion was theone to which he listened with a deference,--the more complete, becauseit was reluctantly paid, and concealed as much as possible.
  



第166章 CHAPTER XXIII \"NE\"ER TO BE FOUND AGAIN\" (1)


　　\"my own, my father\"s friend!
　　i cannot part with thee!
　　i ne\"er have shown, thou ne\"er hast known,how dear thou art to me.\"
　　anon.
　　the elements of the dinner-parties which mrs. lennox gave, werethese; her friends contributed the beauty, captain lennox the easyknowledge of the subjects of the day; and mr. henry lennox and thesprinkling of rising men who were received as his friends, brought thewit, the cleverness, the keen and extensive knowledge of which theyknew well enough how to avail themselves without seeming pedantic,or burdening the rapid flow of conversation.
　　these dinners were delightful; but even here margaret\"s dissatisfactionfound her out. every talent, every feeling, every acquirement; nay, evenevery tendency towards virtue was used up as materials for fireworks;the hidden, sacred fire, exhausted itself in sparkle and crackle. theytalked about art in a merely sensuous way, dwelling on outside effects,instead of allowing themselves to learn what it has to teach. theylashed themselves up into an enthusiasm about high subjects incompany, and never thought about them when they were alone; theysquandered their capabilities of appreciation into a mere flow ofappropriate words. one day, after the gentlemen had come up into thedrawing-room, mr. lennox drew near to margaret, and addressed her inalmost the first voluntary words he had spoken to her since she hadreturned to live in harley street.
　　\"you did not look pleased at what shirley was saying at dinner.\"
　　\"didn\"t i? my face must be very expressive,\" replied margaret.
　　\"it always was. it has not lost the trick of being eloquent.\"
　　\"i did not like,\" said margaret, hastily, \"his way of advocating what heknew to be wrong--so glaringly wrong--even in jest.\"
　　\"but it was very clever. how every word told! do you remember thehappy epithets?\"
　　\"yes.\"
　　\"and despise them, you would like to add. pray don\"t scruple, though heis my friend.\"
　　\"there! that is the exact tone in you, that--\" she stopped short.
　　he listened for a moment to see if she would finish her sentence; butshe only reddened, and turned away; before she did so, however, sheheard him say, in a very low, clear voice,-\"
　　if my tones, or modes of thought, are what you dislike, will you do methe justice to tell me so, and so give me the chance of learning to pleaseyou?\"
　　all these weeks there was no intelligence of mr. bell\"s going to milton.
　　he had spoken of it at helstone as of a journey which he might have totake in a very short time from then; but he must have transacted hisbusiness by writing, margaret thought, ere now, and she knew that if hecould, he would avoid going to a place which he disliked, and moreoverwould little understand the secret importance which she affixed to theexplanation that could only be given by word of mouth. she knew thathe would feel that it was necessary that it should be done; but whetherin summer, autumn, or winter, it would signify very little. it was nowaugust, and there had been no mention of the spanish journey to whichhe had alluded to edith, and margaret tried to reconcile herself to thefading away of this illusion.
　　but one morning she received a letter, saying that next week he meant
　　to come up to town; he wanted to see her about a plan which he had inhis head; and, moreover, he intended to treat himself to a littledoctoring, as he had begun to come round to her opinion, that it wouldbe pleasanter to think that his health was more in fault than he, when hefound himself irritable and cross. there was altogether a tone of forcedcheerfulness in the letter, as margaret noticed afterwards; but at thetime her attention was taken up by edith\"s exclamations.
　　\"coming up to town! oh dear! and i am so worn out by the heat that idon\"t believe i have strength enough in me for another dinner. besides,everybody has left but our dear stupid selves, who can\"t settle where togo to. there would be nobody to meet him.\"
　　\"i\"m sure he would much rather come and dine with us quite alone thanwith the most agreeable strangers you could pick up. besides, if he isnot well he won\"t wish for invitations. i am glad he has owned it at last.
　　i was sure he was ill from the whole tone of his letters, and yet hewould not answer me when i asked him, and i had no third person towhom i could apply for news.\"
　　\"oh! he is not very ill, or he would not think of spain.\"
　　\"he never mentions spain.\"
　　\"no! but his plan that is to be proposed evidently relates to that. butwould you really go in such weather as this?\"
　　\"oh! it will get cooler every day. yes! think of it! i am only afraid ihave thought and wished too much--in that absorbing wilful way whichis sure to be disappointed--or else gratified, to the letter, while in thespirit it gives no pleasure.\"
　　\"but that\"s superstitious, i\"m sure, margaret.\"
　　\"no, i don\"t think it is. only it ought to warn me, and check me fromgiving way to such passionate wishes. it is a sort of \"give me children,or else i die.\" i\"m afraid my cry is, \"let me go to cadiz, or else i die.\"\"
　　\"my dear margaret! you\"ll be persuaded to stay there; and then whatshall i do? oh! i wish i could find somebody for you to marry here, thati could be sure of you!\"
　　\"i shall never marry.\"
　　\"nonsense, and double nonsense! why, as sholto says, you\"re such anattraction to the house, that he knows ever so many men who will beglad to visit here next year for your sake.\"
　　margaret drew herself up haughtily. \"do you know, edith, i sometimesthink your corfu life has taught you----\"
　　\"well!\"
　　\"just a shade or two of coarseness.\"
　　edith began to sob so bitterly, and to declare so vehemently thatmargaret had lost all love for her, and no longer looked upon her as afriend, that margaret came to think that she had expressed too harsh an
　　opinion for the relief of her own wounded pride, and ended by beingedith\"s slave for the rest of the day; while that little lady, overcome bywounded feeling, lay like a victim on the sofa, heaving occasionally aprofound sigh, till at last she fell asleep.
wＷw。xiabｏok.com   www.ｌzuoＷen．Ｃom



第167章 CHAPTER XXIII \"NE\"ER TO BE FOUND AGAIN\" (2)


　　mr. bell did not make his appearance even on the day to which he hadfor a second time deferred his visit. the next morning there came aletter from wallis, his servant, stating that his master had not beenfeeling well for some time, which had been the true reason of hisputting off his journey; and that at the very time when he should haveset out for london, he had been seized with an apoplectic fit; it was,indeed, wallis added, the opinion of the medical men--that he could notsurvive the night; and more than probable, that by the time miss halereceived this letter his poor master would be no more.
　　margaret received this letter at breakfast-time, and turned very pale asshe read it; then silently putting it into edith\"s hands, she left the room.
　　edith was terribly shocked as she read it, and cried in a sobbing,frightened, childish way, much to her husband\"s distress. mrs. shawwas breakfasting in her own room, and upon him devolved the task ofreconciling his wife to the near contact into which she seemed to bebrought with death, for the first time that she could remember in herlife. here was a man who was to have dined with them to-day lyingdead or dying instead! it was some time before she could think ofmargaret. then she started up, and followed her upstairs into her room.
　　dixon was packing up a few toilette articles, and margaret was hastilyputting on her bonnet, shedding tears all the time, and her handstrembling so that she could hardly tie the strings.
　　\"oh, dear margaret! how shocking! what are you doing? are you goingout? sholto would telegraph or do anything you like.\"
　　\"i am going to oxford. there is a train in half-an-hour. dixon hasoffered to go with me, but i could have gone by myself. i must see himagain. besides, he may be better, and want some care. he has been likea father to me. don\"t stop me, edith.\"
　　\"but i must. mamma won\"t like it at all. come and ask her about it,margaret. you don\"t know where you\"re going. i should not mind if hehad a house of his own; but in his fellow\"s rooms! come to mamma,and do ask her before you go. it will not take a minute.\"
　　margaret yielded, and lost her train. in the suddenness of the event,mrs. shaw became bewildered and hysterical, and so the precious timeslipped by. but there was another train in a couple of hours; and aftervarious discussions on propriety and impropriety, it was decided thatcaptain lennox should accompany margaret, as the one thing to whichshe was constant was her resolution to go, alone or otherwise, by thenext train, whatever might be said of the propriety or impropriety of the
　　step. her father\"s friend, her own friend, was lying at the point of death;and the thought of this came upon her with such vividness, that she wassurprised herself at the firmness with which she asserted something ofher right to independence of action; and five minutes before the time forstarting, she found herself sitting in a railway-carriage opposite tocaptain lennox.
　　it was always a comfort to her to think that she had gone, though it wasonly to hear that he had died in the night. she saw the rooms that he hadoccupied, and associated them ever after most fondly in her memorywith the idea of her father, and his one cherished and faithful friend.
　　they had promised edith before starting, that if all had ended as theyfeared, they would return to dinner; so that long, lingering look aroundthe room in which her father had died, had to be interrupted, and a quietfarewell taken of the kind old face that had so often come out withpleasant words, and merry quips and cranks.
　　captain lennox fell asleep on their journey home; and margaret couldcry at leisure, and bethink her of this fatal year, and all the woes it hadbrought to her. no sooner was she fully aware of one loss than anothercame--not to supersede her grief for the one before, but to re-openwounds and feelings scarcely healed. but at the sound of the tendervoices of her aunt and edith, of merry little sholto\"s glee at her arrival,and at the sight of the well-lighted rooms, with their mistress pretty inher paleness and her eager sorrowful interest, margaret roused herselffrom her heavy trance of almost superstitious hopelessness, and beganto feel that even around her joy and gladness might gather. she hadedith\"s place on the sofa; sholto was taught to carry aunt margaret\"s cupof tea very carefully to her; and by the time she went up to dress, shecould thank god for having spared her dear old friend a long or apainful illness.
　　but when night came--solemn night, and all the house was quiet,margaret still sate watching the beauty of a london sky at such an hour,on such a summer evening; the faint pink reflection of earthly lights onthe soft clouds that float tranquilly into the white moonlight, out of thewarm gloom which lies motionless around the horizon. margaret\"s roomhad been the day nursery of her childhood, just when it merged intogirlhood, and when the feelings and conscience had been first awakenedinto full activity. on some such night as this she remembered promisingto herself to live as brave and noble a life as any heroine she ever reador heard of in romance, a life sans peur et sans reproche; it had seemedto her then that she had only to will, and such a life would beaccomplished. and now she had learnt that not only to will, but also topray, was a necessary condition in the truly heroic. trusting to herself,she had fallen. it was a just consequence of her sin, that all excuses for
　　it, all temptation to it, should remain for ever unknown to the person inwhose opinion it had sunk her lowest. she stood face to face at last withher sin. she knew it for what it was; mr. bell\"s kindly sophistry thatnearly all men were guilty of equivocal actions, and that the motiveennobled the evil, had never had much real weight with her. her ownfirst thought of how, if she had known all, she might have fearlesslytold the truth, seemed low and poor. nay, even now, her anxiety to haveher character for truth partially excused in mr. thornton\"s eyes, as mr.
　　bell had promised to do, was a very small and petty consideration, nowthat she was afresh taught by death what life should be. if all the worldspoke, acted, or kept silence with intent to deceive,--if dearest interestswere at stake, and dearest lives in peril,--if no one should ever know ofher truth or her falsehood to measure out their honour or contempt forher by, straight alone where she stood, in the presence of god, sheprayed that she might have strength to speak and act the truth forevermore.
www.7wenxue.com   



第168章 CHAPTER XXIV BREATHING TRANQUILLITY (1)


　　\"and down the sunny beach she paces slowly,with many doubtful pauses by the way;grief hath an influence so hush\"d and holy.\"
　　hood.
　　\"is not margaret the heiress?\" whispered edith to her husband, as theywere in their room alone at night after the sad journey to oxford. shehad pulled his tall head down, and stood upon tiptoe, and implored himnot to be shocked, before she had ventured to ask this question. captainlennox was, however, quite in the dark; if he had ever heard, he hadforgotten; it could not be much that a fellow of a small college had toleave; but he had never wanted her to pay for her board; and twohundred and fifty pounds a year was something ridiculous, consideringthat she did not take wine. edith came down upon her feet a little bitsadder; with a romance blown to pieces.
　　a week afterwards, she came prancing towards her husband, and madehim a low curtsey:
　　\"i am right, and you are wrong, most noble captain. margaret has had alawyer\"s letter, and she is residuary legatee--the legacies being abouttwo thousand pounds, and the remainder about forty thousand, at thepresent value of property in milton.\"
　　\"indeed! and how does she take her good fortune?\"
　　\"oh, it seems she knew she was to have it all along; only she had noidea it was so much. she looks very white and pale, and says she\"safraid of it; but that\"s nonsense, you know, and will soon go off. i leftmamma pouring congratulations down her throat, and stole away to tellyou.\"
　　it seemed to be supposed, by general consent, that the most naturalthing was to consider mr. lennox henceforward as margaret\"s legaladviser. she was so entirely ignorant of all forms of business that innearly everything she had to refer to him. he chose out her attorney; hecame to her with papers to be signed. he was never so happy as whenteaching her of what all these mysteries of the law were the signs andtypes.
　　\"henry,\" said edith, one day, archly; \"do you know what i hope andexpect all these long conversations with margaret will end in?\"
　　\"no, i don\"t,\" said he, reddening. \"and i desire you not to tell me.\"
　　\"oh, very well; then i need not tell sholto not to ask mr. montagu sooften to the house.\"
　　\"just as you choose,\" said he with forced coolness. \"what you arethinking of, may or may not happen; but this time, before i commitmyself, i will see my ground clear. ask whom you choose. it may notbe very civil, edith, but if you meddle in it you will mar it. she hasbeen very farouche with me for a long time; and is only just beginningto thaw a little from her zenobia ways. she has the making of acleopatra in her, if only she were a little more pagan.\"
　　\"for my part,\" said edith, a little maliciously, \"i am very glad she is achristian. i know so very few!\"
　　there was no spain for margaret that autumn; although to the last shehoped that some fortunate occasion would call frederick to paris,whither she could easily have met with a convoy. instead of cadiz, shehad to content herself with cromer. to that place her aunt shaw and thelennoxes were bound. they had all along wished her to accompanythem, and, consequently, with their characters, they made but lazyefforts to forward her own separate wish. perhaps cromer was, in onesense of the expression, the best for her. she needed bodilystrengthening and bracing as well as rest.
　　among other hopes that had vanished, was the hope, the trust she had
　　had, that mr. bell would have given mr. thornton the simple facts ofthe family circumstances which had preceded the unfortunate accidentthat led to leonards\" death. whatever opinion--however changed itmight be from what mr. thornton had once entertained, she had wishedit to be based upon a true understanding of what she had done; and whyshe had done it. it would have been a pleasure to her; would have givenher rest on a point on which she should now all her life be restless,unless she could resolve not to think upon it. it was now so long afterthe time of these occurrences, that there was no possible way ofexplaining them save the one which she had lost by mr. bell\"s death.
　　she must just submit, like many another, to be misunderstood; but,though reasoning herself into the belief that in this hers was nouncommon lot, her heart did not ache the less with longing that sometime--years and years hence--before he died at any rate, he might knowhow much she had been tempted. she thought that she did not want tohear that all was explained to him, if only she could be sure that hewould know. but this wish was vain, like so many others; and when shehad schooled herself into this conviction, she turned with all her heartand strength to the life that lay immediately before her, and resolved tostrive and make the best of that.
　　she used to sit long hours upon the beach, gazing intently on the wavesas they chafed with perpetual motion against the pebbly shore,--or shelooked out upon the more distant heave, and sparkle against the sky,and heard, without being conscious of hearing, the eternal psalm, whichwent up continually. she was soothed without knowing how or why.
　　listlessly she sat there, on the ground, her hands clasped round herknees, while her aunt shaw did small shoppings, and edith and captainlennox rode far and wide on shore and inland. the nurses, saunteringon with their charges, would pass and repass her, and wonder inwhispers what she could find to look at so long, day after day. andwhen the family gathered at dinner-time, margaret was so silent andabsorbed that edith voted her moped, and hailed a proposal of herhusband\"s with great satisfaction, that mr. henry lennox should beasked to take cromer for a week, on his return from scotland inoctober.
　　but all this time for thought enabled margaret to put events in theirright places, as to origin and significance, both as regarded her past lifeand her future. those hours by the sea-side were not lost, as any onemight have seen who had had the perception to read, or the care tounderstand, the look that margaret\"s face was gradually acquiring. mr.
　　henry lennox was excessively struck by the change.
　　\"the sea has done miss hale an immense deal of good, i should fancy,\"
　　said he, when she first left the room after his arrival in their family
　　circle. \"she looks ten years younger than she did in harley street.\"




第169章 CHAPTER XXIV BREATHING TRANQUILLITY (2)


　　\"that\"s the bonnet i got her!\" said edith, triumphantly. \"i knew it wouldsuit her the moment i saw it.\"
　　\"i beg your pardon,\" said mr. lennox, in the half-contemptuous, half-indulgent tone he generally used to edith. \"but i believe i know thedifference between the charms of a dress and the charms of a woman.
　　no mere bonnet would have made miss hale\"s eyes so lustrous and yetso soft, or her lips so ripe and red--and her face altogether so full ofpeace and light.--she is like, and yet more,\"--he dropped his voice,--\"likethe margaret hale of helstone.\"
　　from this time the clever and ambitious man bent all his powers togaining margaret. he loved her sweet beauty. he saw the latent sweepof her mind, which could easily (he thought) be led to embrace all theobjects on which he had set his heart. he looked upon her fortune onlyas a part of the complete and superb character of herself and herposition: yet he was fully aware of the rise which it would immediatelyenable him, the poor barrister, to take. eventually he would earn suchsuccess, and such honours, as would enable him to pay her back, withinterest, that first advance in wealth which he should owe to her. he hadbeen to milton on business connected with her property, on his returnfrom scotland; and with the quick eye of a skilled lawyer, ready ever totake in and weigh contingencies, he had seen that much additional valuewas yearly accruing to the lands and tenements which she owned in thatprosperous and increasing town. he was glad to find that the presentrelationship between margaret and himself, of client and legal adviser,was gradually superseding the recollection of that unlucky, mismanagedday at helstone. he had thus unusual opportunities of intimateintercourse with her, besides those that arose from the connectionbetween the families.
　　margaret was only too willing to listen as long as he talked of milton,though he had seen none of the people whom she more especially knew.
　　it had been the tone with her aunt and cousin to speak of milton withdislike and contempt; just such feelings as margaret was ashamed toremember she had expressed and felt on first going to live there. butmr. lennox almost exceeded margaret in his appreciation of thecharacter of milton and its inhabitants. their energy, their power, theirindomitable courage in struggling and fighting; their lurid vividness ofexistence, captivated and arrested his attention. he was never tired oftalking about them; and had never perceived how selfish and materialwere too many of the ends they proposed to themselves as the result ofall their mighty, untiring endeavour, till margaret, even in the midst ofher gratification, had the candour to point this out, as the tainting sin inso much that was noble, and to be admired. still, when other subjects
　　palled upon her, and she gave but short answers to many questions,henry lennox found out that an enquiry as to some darkshirepeculiarity of character, called back the light into her eye, the glow intoher cheek.
　　when they returned to town, margaret fulfilled one of her sea-sideresolves, and took her life into her own hands. before they went tocromer, she had been as docile to her aunt\"s laws as if she were still thescared little stranger who cried herself to sleep that first night in theharley street nursery. but she had learnt, in those solemn hours ofthought, that she herself must one day answer for her own life, and whatshe had done with it; and she tried to settle that most difficult problemfor women, how much was to be utterly merged in obedience toauthority, and how much might be set apart for freedom in working.
　　mrs. shaw was as good-tempered as could be; and edith had inheritedthis charming domestic quality; margaret herself had probably theworst temper of the three, for her quick perceptions, and over-livelyimagination made her hasty, and her early isolation from sympathy hadmade her proud; but she had an indescribable childlike sweetness ofheart, which made her manners, even in her rarely wilful moods,irresistible of old; and now, chastened even by what the world calledher good fortune, she charmed her reluctant aunt into acquiescence withher will. so margaret gained the acknowledgment of her right to followher own ideas of duty.
　　\"only don\"t be strong-minded,\" pleaded edith. \"mamma wants you tohave a footman of your own; and i\"m sure you\"re very welcome, forthey\"re great plagues. only to please me, darling, don\"t go and have astrong mind; it\"s the only thing i ask. footman or no footman, don\"t bestrong-minded.\"
　　\"don\"t be afraid, edith. i\"ll faint on your hands at the servants\" dinnertime,the very first opportunity; and then, what with sholto playing withthe fire, and the baby crying, you\"ll begin to wish for a strong-mindedwoman, equal to any emergency.\"
　　\"and you\"ll not grow too good to joke and be merry?\"
　　\"not i. i shall be merrier than i have ever been, now i have got my ownway.\"
　　\"and you\"ll not go a figure, but let me buy your dresses for you?\"
　　\"indeed i mean to buy them for myself. you shall come with me if youlike; but no one can please me but myself.\"
　　\"oh! i was afraid you\"d dress in brown and dust-colour, not to show thedirt you\"ll pick up in all those places. i\"m glad you\"re going to keep oneor two vanities, just by way of specimens of the old adam.\"
　　\"i\"m going to be just the same, edith, if you and my aunt could but fancyso. only as i have neither husband nor child to give me natural duties, i
　　must make myself some, in addition to ordering my gowns.\"
　　in the family conclave, which was made up of edith, her mother, andher husband, it was decided that perhaps all these plans of hers wouldonly secure her the more for henry lennox. they kept her out of theway of other friends who might have eligible sons or brothers; and itwas also agreed that she never seemed to take much pleasure in thesociety of any one but henry, out of their own family. the otheradmirers, attracted by her appearance or the reputation of her fortune,were swept away, by her unconscious smiling disdain, into the pathsfrequented by other beauties less fastidious, or other heiresses with alarger amount of gold. henry and she grew slowly into closer intimacy;but neither he nor she were people to brook the slightest notice of theirproceedings.
www.ｌzuoＷeＮ．ＣＯＭ



第170章 CHAPTER XXV CHANGES AT MILTON (1)


　　\"here we go up, up, up;and here we go down, down, downee!\"
　　nursery song.
　　meanwhile, at milton the chimneys smoked, the ceaseless roar andmighty beat, and dizzying whirl of machinery, struggled and stroveperpetually. senseless and purposeless were wood and iron and steamin their endless labours; but the persistence of their monotonous workwas rivalled in tireless endurance by the strong crowds, who, with senseand with purpose, were busy and restless in seeking after--what? in thestreets there were few loiterers,--none walking for mere pleasure; everyman\"s face was set in lines of eagerness or anxiety; news was sought forwith fierce avidity; and men jostled each other aside in the mart and inthe exchange, as they did in life, in the deep selfishness of competition.
　　there was gloom over the town. few came to buy, and those who didwere looked at suspiciously by the sellers; for credit was insecure, andthe most stable might have their fortunes affected by the sweep in thegreat neighbouring port among the shipping houses. hitherto there hadbeen no failures in milton; but, from the immense speculations that had
　　come to light in making a bad end in america, and yet nearer home, itwas known that some milton houses of business must suffer so severelythat every day men\"s faces asked, if their tongues did not, \"what news?
　　who is gone? how will it affect me?\" and if two or three spoketogether, they dwelt rather on the names of those who were safe thandared to hint at those likely, in their opinion, to go; for idle breath may,at such times, cause the downfall of some who might otherwise weatherthe storm; and one going down drags many after. \"thornton is safe,\" saythey. \"his business is large--extending every year; but such a head as hehas, and so prudent with all his daring!\" then one man draws anotheraside, and walks a little apart, and, with head inclined into hisneighbour\"s ear, he says, \"thornton\"s business is large; but he has spenthis profits in extending it; he has no capital laid by; his machinery isnew within these two years, and has cost him--we won\"t say what!--aword to the wise!\" but that mr. harrison was a croaker,--a man who hadsucceeded to his father\"s trade-made fortune, which he had feared tolose by altering his mode of business to any having a larger scope; yethe grudged every penny made by others more daring and far-sighted.
　　but the truth was, mr. thornton was hard pressed. he felt it acutely inhis vulnerable point--his pride in the commercial character which hehad established for himself. architect of his own fortunes, he attributedthis to no special merit or qualities of his own, but to the power, whichhe believed that commerce gave to every brave, honest, and perseveringman, to raise himself to a level from which he might see and read thegreat game of worldly success, and honestly, by such far-sightedness,command more power and influence than in. any other mode of life. faraway, in the east and in the west, where his person would never beknown, his name was to be regarded, and his wishes to be fulfilled, andhis word pass like gold. that was the idea of merchant-life with whichmr. thornton had started. \"her merchants be like princes,\" said hismother, reading the text aloud, as if it were a trumpet-call to invite herboy to the struggle. he was but like many others--men, women, andchildren--alive to distant, and dead to near things. he sought to possessthe influence of a name in foreign countries and far-away seas,--tobecome the head of a firm that should be known for generations; and ithad taken him long silent years to come even to a glimmering of whathe might be now, to-day, here in his own town, his own factory, amonghis own people. he and they had led parallel lives--very close, but nevertouching--till the accident (or so it seemed) of his acquaintance withhiggins. once brought face to face, man to man, with an individual ofthe masses around him, and (take notice) out of the character of masterand workman, in the first instance, they had each begun to recognisethat \"we have all of us one human heart.\" it was the fine point of the
　　wedge; and until now, when the apprehension of losing his connectionwith two or three of the workmen whom he had so lately begun to knowas men,--of having a plan or two, which were experiments lying veryclose to his heart, roughly nipped off without trial,--gave a newpoignancy to the subtle fear that came over him from time to time; untilnow, he had never recognised how much and how deep was the interesthe had grown of late to feel in his position as manufacturer, simplybecause it led him into such close contact, and gave him the opportunityof so much power, among a race of people strange, shrewd, ignorant;but, above all, full of character and strong human feeling.
　　he reviewed his position as a milton manufacturer. the strike a yearand a half ago,--or more, for it was now untimely wintry weather, in alate spring,--that strike, when he was young, and he now was old--hadprevented his completing some of the large orders he had then on hand.
　　he had locked up a good deal of his capital in new and expensivemachinery, and he had also bought cotton largely, for the fulfilment ofthese orders, taken under contract. that he had not been able tocomplete them, was owing in some degree to the utter want of skill onthe part of the irish hands whom he had imported; much of their workwas damaged and unfit to be sent forth by a house which prided itselfon turning out nothing but first-rate articles. for many months, theembarrassment caused by the strike had been an obstacle in mr.




第171章 CHAPTER XXV CHANGES AT MILTON (2)


　　thornton\"s way; and often, when his eye fell on higgins, he could havespoken angrily to him without any present cause, just from feeling howserious was the injury that had arisen from this affair in which he wasimplicated. but when he became conscious of this sudden, quickresentment, he resolved to curb it. it would not satisfy him to avoidhiggins; he must convince himself that he was master over his ownanger, by being particularly careful to allow higgins access to him,whenever the strict rules of business, or mr. thornton\"s leisurepermitted. and by-and-bye, he lost all sense of resentment in wonderhow it was, or could be, that two men like himself and higgins, livingby the same trade, working in their different ways at the same object,could look upon each other\"s position and duties in so strangelydifferent a way. and thence arose that intercourse, which though itmight not have the effect of preventing all future clash of opinion andaction, when the occasion arose, would, at any rate, enable both masterand man to look upon each other with far more charity and sympathy,and bear with each other more patiently and kindly. besides thisimprovement of feeling, both mr. thornton and his workmen found outtheir ignorance as to positive matters of fact, known heretofore to oneside, but not to the other.
　　but now had come one of those periods of bad trade, when the market
　　falling brought down the value of all large stocks; mr. thornton\"s fell tonearly half. no orders were coming in; so he lost the interest of thecapital he had locked up in machinery; indeed, it was difficult to getpayment for the orders completed; yet there was the constant drain ofexpenses for working the business. then the bills became due for thecotton he had purchased; and money being scarce, he could only borrowat exorbitant interest, and yet he could not realise any of his property.
　　but he did not despair; he exerted himself day and night to foresee andto provide for all emergencies; he was as calm and gentle to the womenin his home as ever; to the workmen in his mill he spoke not manywords, but they knew him by this time; and many a curt, decidedanswer was received by them rather with sympathy for the care theysaw pressing upon him, than with the suppressed antagonism which hadformerly been smouldering, and ready for hard words and hardjudgments on all occasions. \"th\" measter\"s a deal to potter him,\" saidhiggins, one day, as he heard mr. thornton\"s short, sharp inquiry, whysuch a command had not been obeyed; and caught the sound of thesuppressed sigh which he heaved in going past the room where some ofthe men were working. higgins and another man stopped over-hoursthat night, unknown to any one, to get the neglected piece of workdone; and mr. thornton never knew but that the overlooker, to whomhe had given the command in the first instance, had done it himself\"eh! i reckon i know who\"d ha\" been sorry for to see our measter sittingso like a piece o\" grey calico! th\" ou\"d parson would ha\" fretted hiswoman\"s heart out, if he\"d seen the woeful looks i have seen on ourmeaster\"s face,\" thought higgins, one day, as he was approaching mr.
　　thornton in marlborough street.
　　\"measter,\" said he, stopping his employer in his quick resolved walk,and causing that gentleman to look up with a sudden annoyed start, as ifhis thoughts had been far away.
　　\"have yo\" heerd aught of miss marget lately?\"
　　\"miss--who?\" replied mr. thornton.
　　\"miss marget--miss hale--th\" oud parson\"s daughter--yo known who imean well enough, if yo\"ll only think a bit--\" (there was nothingdisrespectful in the tone in which this was said).
　　\"oh yes!\" and suddenly, the wintry frost-bound look of care had left mr.
　　thornton\"s face, as if some soft summer gale had blown all anxietyaway from his mind; and though his mouth was as much compressed asbefore, his eyes smiled out benignly on his questioner.
　　\"she\"s my landlord now, you know, higgins. i hear of her through heragent here, every now and then. she\"s well and among friends--thankyou, higgins.\" that \"thank you\" that lingered after the other words, andyet came with so much warmth of feeling, let in a new light to the acute
　　higgins. it might be but a will-o\"-th\"-wisp, but he thought he wouldfollow it and ascertain whither it would lead him.
　　\"and she\"s not getten married, measter?\"
　　\"not yet.\" the face was cloudy once more. \"there is some talk of it, as iunderstand, with a connection of the family.\"
　　\"then she\"ll not be for coming to milton again, i reckon.\"
　　\"no!\"
　　\"stop a minute, measter.\" then going up confidentially close, he said, \"isth\" young gentleman cleared?\" he enforced the depth of his intelligenceby a wink of the eye, which only made things more mysterious to mr.
　　thornton.
　　\"th\" young gentleman, i mean--master frederick, they ca\"ad him--herbrother as was over here, yo\" known.\"
　　\"over here.\"
　　\"ay, to be sure, at th\" missus\"s death. yo\" need na be feared of mytelling; for mary and me, we knowed it all along, only we held ourpeace, for we got it through mary working. in th\" house.\"
　　\"and he was over. it was her brother!\"
　　\"sure enough, and i reckoned yo\" knowed it or i\"d never ha\" let on. yo\"
　　knowed she had a brother?\"
　　\"yes, i know all about him. and he was over at mrs. hale\"s death?\"
　　\"nay! i\"m not going for to tell more. i\"ve maybe getten them intomischief already, for they kept it very close. i nobbut wanted to know ifthey\"d getten him cleared?\"
　　\"not that i know of. i know nothing. i only hear of miss hale, now, asmy landlord, and through her lawyer.\"
　　he broke off from higgins, to follow the business on which he had beenbent when the latter first accosted him; leaving higgins baffled in hisendeavour.
　　\"it was her brother,\" said mr. thornton to himself. \"i am glad. i maynever see her again; but it is a comfort--a relief--to know that much. iknew she could not be unmaidenly; and yet i yearned for conviction.
　　now i am glad!\"
　　it was a little golden thread running through the dark web of his presentfortunes; which were growing ever gloomier and more gloomy. hisagent had largely trusted a house in the american trade, which wentdown, along with several others, just at this time, like a pack of cards,the fall of one compelling other failures. what were mr. thornton\"sengagements? could he stand?
wwＷ、xiabook.com下+书+网



第172章 CHAPTER XXV CHANGES AT MILTON (3)


　　night after night he took books and papers into his own private room,and sate up there long after the family were gone to bed. he thoughtthat no one knew of this occupation of the hours he should have spent insleep. one morning, when daylight was stealing in through the crevices
　　of his shutters, and he had never been in bed, and, in hopelessindifference of mind, was thinking that he could do without the hour ortwo of rest, which was all that he should be able to take before the stirof daily labour began again, the door of his room opened, and hismother stood there, dressed as she had been the day before. she hadnever laid herself down to slumber any more than he. their eyes met.
　　their faces were cold and rigid, and wan, from long watching.
　　\"mother! why are not you in bed?\"
　　\"son john,\" said she, \"do you think i can sleep with an easy mind, whileyou keep awake full of care? you have not told me what your troubleis; but sore trouble you have had these many days past.\"
　　\"trade is bad.\"
　　\"and you dread----\"
　　\"i dread nothing,\" replied he, drawing up his head, and holding it erect. \"iknow now that no man will suffer by me. that was my anxiety.\"
　　\"but how do you stand? shall you--will it be a failure?\" her steady voicetrembling in an unwonted manner.
　　\"not a failure. i must give up business, but i pay all men. i mightredeem myself--i am sorely tempted--\"
　　\"how? oh, john! keep up your name--try all risks for that. how redeemit?\"
　　\"by a speculation offered to me, full of risk; but, if successful, placingme high above water-mark, so that no one need ever know the strait iam in. still, if it fails--\"
　　\"and if it fails,\" said she, advancing, and laying her hand on his arm, hereyes full of eager light. she held her breath to hear the end of hisspeech.
　　\"honest men are ruined by a rogue,\" said he gloomily. \"as i stand now,my creditors, money is safe--every farthing of it; but i don\"t knowwhere to find my own--it may be all gone, and i penniless at thismoment. therefore, it is my creditors\" money that i should risk.\"
　　\"but if it succeeded, they need never know. is it so desperate aspeculation? i am sure it is not, or you would never have thought of it.
　　if it succeeded--\"
　　\"i should be a rich man, and my peace of conscience would be gone!\"
　　\"why! you would have injured no one.\"
　　\"no; but i should have run the risk of ruining many for my own paltryaggrandisement. mother, i have decided! you won\"t much grieve overour leaving this house, shall you, dear mother?\"
　　\"no! but to have you other than what you are will break my heart. whatcan you do?\"
　　\"be always the same john thornton in whatever circumstances;endeavouring to do right, and making great blunders; and then trying to
　　be brave in setting to afresh. but it is hard, mother. i have so workedand planned. i have discovered new powers in my situation too late-andnow all is over. i am too old to begin again with the same heart. itis hard, mother.\"
　　he turned away from her, and covered his face with his hands.
　　\"i can\"t think,\" said she, with gloomy defiance in her tone, \"how it comesabout. here is my boy--good son, just man, tender heart--and he fails inall he sets his mind upon: he finds a woman to love, and she cares nomore for his affection than if he had been any common man; he labours,and his labour comes to nought. other people prosper and grow rich,and hold their paltry names high and dry above shame.\"
　　\"shame never touched me,\" said he, in a low tone: but she went on.
　　\"i sometimes have wondered where justice was gone to, and now i don\"tbelieve there is such a thing in the world,--now you are come to this;you, my own john thornton, though you and i may be beggars together-my own dear son!\"
　　she fell upon his neck, and kissed him through her tears.
　　\"mother!\" said he, holding her gently in his arms, \"who has sent me mylot in life, both of good and of evil?\"
　　she shook her head. she would have nothing to do with religion justthen.
   http://www.xiaboＯk.com



第173章 CHAPTER XXV CHANGES AT MILTON (4)


　　\"mother,\" he went on, seeing that she would not speak, \"i, too, have beenrebellious; but i am striving to be so no longer. help me, as you helpedme when i was a child. then you said many good words--when myfather died, and we were sometimes sorely short of comforts--which weshall never be now; you said brave, noble, trustful words then, mother,which i have never forgotten, though they may have lain dormant.
　　speak to me again in the old way, mother. do not let us have to thinkthat the world has too much hardened our hearts. if you would say theold good words, it would make me feel something of the pioussimplicity of my childhood. i say them to myself, but they would comedifferently from you, remembering all the cares and trials you have hadto bear.\"
　　\"i have had a many,\" said she, sobbing, \"but none so sore as this. to seeyou cast down from your rightful place! i could say it for myself, john,but not for you. not for you! god has seen fit to be very hard on you,very.\"
　　she shook with the sobs that come so convulsively when an old personweeps. the silence around her struck her at last; and she quieted herselfto listen. no sound. she looked. her son sate by the table, his armsthrown half across it, his head bent face downwards.
　　\"oh, john!\" she said, and she lifted his face up. such a strange, pallidlook of gloom was on it, that for a moment it struck her that this look
　　was the forerunner of death; but, as the rigidity melted out of thecountenance and the natural colour returned, and she saw that he washimself once again, all worldly mortification sank to nothing before theconsciousness of the great blessing that he himself by his simpleexistence was to her. she thanked god for this, and this alone, with afervour that swept away all rebellious feelings from her mind.
　　he did not speak readily; but he went and opened the shutters, and letthe ruddy light of dawn flood the room. but the wind was in the east;the weather was piercing cold, as it had been for weeks; there would beno demand for light summer goods this year. that hope for the revivalof trade must utterly be given up.
　　it was a great comfort to have had this conversation with his mother;and to feel sure that, however they might henceforward keep silence onall these anxieties, they yet understood each other\"s feelings, and were,if not in harmony, at least not in discord with each other, in their way ofviewing them. fanny\"s husband was vexed at thornton\"s refusal to takeany share in the speculation which he had offered to him, and withdrewfrom any possibility of being supposed able to assist him with the readymoney, which indeed the speculator needed for his own venture.
　　there was nothing for it at last, but that which mr. thornton haddreaded for many weeks; he had to give up the business in which he hadbeen so long engaged with so much. honour and success; and look outfor a subordinate situation. marlborough mills and the adjacentdwelling were held under a long lease; they must, if possible, be relet.
　　there was an immediate choice of situations offered to mr. thornton.
　　mr. hamper would have been only too glad to have secured him as asteady and experienced partner for his son, whom he was setting upwith a large capital in a neighbouring town; but the young man was half-educated as regarded information, and wholly uneducated as regardedany other responsibility than that of getting money, and brutalised bothas to his pleasures and his pains. mr. thornton declined having anyshare in a partnership, which would frustrate what few plans he had thatsurvived the wreck of his fortunes. he would sooner consent to be onlya manager, where he could have a certain degree of power beyond themere money-getting part, than have to fall in with the tyrannicalhumours of a moneyed partner with whom he felt sure that he shouldquarrel in a few months.
　　so he waited, and stood on one side with profound humility, as thenews swept through the exchange, of the enormous fortune which hisbrother-in-law had made by his daring speculation. it was a nine days\"
　　wonder. success brought with it its worldly consequence of extremeadmiration. no one was considered so wise and far-seeing as mr.
　　watson.




第174章 CHAPTER XXVI MEETING AGAIN (1)


　　\"bear up, brave heart! we will be calm and strong;sure, we can master eyes, or cheek, or tongue,nor let the smallest tell-tale sign appearshe ever was, and is, and will be dear.\"
　　rhyming play.
　　it was a hot summer\"s evening. edith came into margaret\"s bedroom, thefirst time in her habit, the second ready dressed for dinner. no one wasthere at first; the next time edith found dixon laying out margaret\"sdress on the bed; but no margaret. edith remained to fidget about.
　　\"oh, dixon! not those horrid blue flowers to that dead gold-colouredgown. what taste! wait a minute, and i will bring you somepomegranate blossoms.\"
　　\"it\"s not a dead gold-colour, ma\"am. it\"s a straw-colour. and blue alwaysgoes with straw-colour.\" but edith had brought the brilliant scarletflowers before dixon had got half through her remonstrance.
　　\"where is miss hale?\" asked edith, as soon as she had tried the effect ofthe garniture. \"i can\"t think,\" she went on, pettishly, \"how my auntallowed her to get into such rambling habits in milton! i\"m sure i\"malways expecting to hear of her having met with something horribleamong all those wretched places she pokes herself into. i should neverdare to go down some of those streets without a servant. they\"re not fitfor ladies.\"
　　dixon was still huffed about her despised taste; so she replied, rathershortly:
　　\"it\"s no wonder to my mind, when i hear ladies talk such a deal aboutbeing ladies--and when they\"re such fearful, delicate, dainty ladies too-isay it\"s no wonder to me that there are no longer any saints on earth---\"
　　\"oh, margaret! here you are! i have been so wanting you. but how yourcheeks are flushed with the heat, poor child! but only think what that
　　tiresome henry has done; really, he exceeds brother-in-law\"s limits. justwhen my party was made up so beautifully--fitted in so precisely formr. colthurst--there has henry come, with an apology it is true, andmaking use of your name for an excuse, and asked me if he may bringthat mr. thornton of milton--your tenant, you know--who is in londonabout some law business. it will spoil my number, quite.\"
　　\"i don\"t mind dinner. i don\"t want any,\" said margaret, in a low voice.
　　\"dixon can get me a cup of tea here, and i will be in the drawing-roomby the time you come up. i shall really be glad to lie down.\"
　　\"no, no! that will never do. you do look wretchedly white, to be sure;but that is just the heat, and we can\"t do without you possibly. (thoseflowers a little lower, dixon. they look glorious flames, margaret, inyour black hair.) you know we planned you to talk about milton to mr.
　　colthurst. oh! to be sure! and this man comes from milton. i believe itwill be capital, after all. mr. colthurst can pump him well on all thesubjects in which he is interested, and it will be great fun to trace outyour experiences, and this mr. thornton\"s wisdom, in mr. colthurst\"snext speech in the house. really, i think it is a happy hit of henry\"s. iasked him if he was a man one would be ashamed of; and he replied,\"not if you\"ve any sense in you, my little sister.\" so i suppose he is ableto sound his h\"s, which is not a common darkshire accomplishment--eh,margaret?\"
　　\"mr. lennox did not say why mr. thornton was come up to town? wasit law business connected with the property?\" asked margaret, in aconstrained voice.
　　\"oh! he\"s failed, or something of the kind, that henry told you of thatday you had such a headache,--what was it? (there, that\"s capital,dixon. miss hale does us credit, does she not?) i wish i was as tall as aqueen, and as brown as a gipsy, margaret.\"
　　\"but about mr. thornton?\"
　　\"oh i really have such a terrible head for law business. henry will likenothing better than to tell you all about it. i know the impression hemade upon me was, that mr. thornton is very badly off, and a veryrespectable man, and that i\"m to be very civil to him; and as i did notknow how, i came to you to ask you to help me. and now come downwith me, and rest on the sofa for a quarter of an hour.\"
　　the privileged brother-in-law came early and margaret reddening asshe spoke, began to ask him the questions she wanted to hear answeredabout mr. thornton.
　　\"he came up about this sub-letting the property--marlborough mills,and the house and premises adjoining, i mean. he is unable to keep iton; and there are deeds and leases to be looked over, and agreements tobe drawn up. i hope edith will receive him properly; but she was rather
　　put out, as i could see, by the liberty i had taken in begging for aninvitation for him. but i thought you would like to have some attentionshown him: and one would be particularly scrupulous in paying everyrespect to a man who is going down in the world.\" he had dropped hisvoice to speak to margaret, by whom he was sitting; but as he ended hesprang up, and introduced mr. thornton, who had that moment entered,to edith and captain lennox.
　　margaret looked with an anxious eye at mr. thornton while he was thusoccupied. it was considerably more than a year since she had seen him;and events had occurred to change him much in that time. his finefigure yet bore him above the common height of men; and gave him adistinguished appearance, from the ease of motion which arose out of it,and was natural to him; but his face looked older and care-worn; yet anoble composure sate upon it, which impressed those who had just beenhearing of his changed position, with a sense of inherent dignity andmanly strength. he was aware, from the first glance he had given roundthe room, that margaret was there; he had seen her intent look ofoccupation as she listened to mr. henry lennox; and he came up to herwith the perfectly regulated manner of an old friend. with his first calmwords a vivid colour flashed into her cheeks, which never left themagain during the evening. she did not seem to have much to say to him.
　　she disappointed him by the quiet way in which she asked what seemedto him to be the merely necessary questions respecting her oldacquaintances, in milton; but others came in--more intimate in thehouse than he--and he fell into the background, where he and mr.
　　lennox talked together from time to time.
www．Ｌｚｕｏｗｅｎ．ｃｏｍ.  



第175章 CHAPTER XXVI MEETING AGAIN (2)


　　\"you think miss hale looking well,\" said mr. lennox, \"don\"t you? miltondidn\"t agree with her, i imagine; for when she first came to london, ithought i had never seen any one so much changed. to-night she islooking radiant. but she is much stronger. last autumn she was fatiguedwith a walk of a couple of miles. on friday evening we walked up tohampstead and back. yet on saturday she looked as well as she doesnow.
　　\"we!\" who? they two alone?
　　mr. colthurst was a very clever man, and a rising member ofparliament. he had a quick eye at discerning character, and was struckby a remark which mr. thornton made at dinner-time. he enquiredfrom edith who that gentleman was; and, rather to her surprise, shefound, from the tone of his \"indeed!\" that mr. thornton of milton wasnot such an unknown name to him as she had imagined it would be. herdinner was going off well. henry was in good humour, and brought outhis dry caustic wit admirably. mr. thornton and mr. colthurst foundone or two mutual subjects of interest, which they could only touch
　　upon then, reserving them for more private after-dinner talk. margaretlooked beautiful in the pomegranate flowers; and if she did lean back inher chair and speak but little, edith was not annoyed, for theconversation flowed on smoothly without her. margaret was watchingmr. thornton\"s face. he never looked at her; so she might study himunobserved, and note the changes which even this short time hadwrought in him. only at some unexpected mot of mr. lennox\"s, his faceflashed out into the old look of intense enjoyment; the merry brightnessreturned to his eyes, the lips just parted to suggest the brilliant smile offormer days; and for an instant, his glance instinctively sought hers, asif he wanted her sympathy. but when their eyes met, his wholecountenance changed; he was grave and anxious once more; and heresolutely avoided even looking near her again during dinner.
　　there were only two ladies besides their own party, and as these wereoccupied in conversation by her aunt and edith, when they went up intothe drawing-room, margaret languidly employed herself about somework. presently the gentlemen came up, mr. colthurst and mr.
　　thornton in close conversation. mr. lennox drew near to margaret, andsaid in a low voice:
　　\"i really think edith owes me thanks for my contribution to her party.
　　you\"ve no idea what an agreeable, sensible fellow this tenant of yoursis. he has been the very man to give colthurst all the facts he wantedcoaching in. i can\"t conceive how he contrived to mismanage hisaffairs.\"
　　\"with his powers and opportunities you would have succeeded,\" saidmargaret. he did not quite relish the tone in which she spoke, althoughthe words but expressed a thought which had passed through his ownmind. as he was silent, they caught a swell in the sound of conversationgoing on near the fire-place between mr. colthurst and mr. thornton.
　　\"i assure you, i heard it spoken of with great interest--curiosity as to itsresult, perhaps i should rather say. i heard your name frequentlymentioned during my short stay in the neighbourhood.\" then they lostsome words; and when next they could hear mr. thornton wasspeaking.
　　\"i have not the elements for popularity--if they spoke of me in that way,they were mistaken. i fall slowly into new projects; and i find it difficultto let myself be known, even by those whom i desire to know, and withwhom i would fain have no reserve. yet, even with all these drawbacks,i felt that i was on the right path, and that, starting from a kind offriendship with one, i was becoming acquainted with many. theadvantages were mutual: we were both unconsciously and consciouslyteaching each other.\"
　　\"you say \"were.\" i trust you are intending to pursue the same course?\"




第176章 CHAPTER XXVI MEETING AGAIN (3)


　　\"i must stop colthurst,\" said henry lennox, hastily. and by an abrupt,yet apropos question, he turned the current of the conversation, so asnot to give mr. thornton the mortification of acknowledging his wantof success and consequent change of position. but as soon as the newly-started subject had come to a close, mr. thornton resumed theconversation just where it had been interrupted, and gave mr. colthurstthe reply to his inquiry.
　　\"i have been unsuccessful in business, and have had to give up myposition as a master. i am on the look out for a situation in milton,where i may meet with employment under some one who will bewilling to let me go along my own way in such matters as these. i candepend upon myself for having no go-ahead theories that i would rashlybring into practice. my only wish is to have the opportunity ofcultivating some intercourse with the hands beyond the mere \"cashnexus.\" but it might be the point archimedes sought from which tomove the earth, to judge from the importance attached to it by some ofour manufacturers, who shake their heads and look grave as soon as iname the one or two experiments that i should like to try.\"
　　\"you call them \"experiments\" i notice,\" said mr. colthurst, with adelicate increase of respect in his manner.
　　\"because i believe them to be such. i am not sure of the consequencesthat may result from them. but i am sure they ought to be tried. i havearrived at the conviction that no mere institutions, however wise, andhowever much thought may have been required to organise and arrangethem, can attach class to class as they should be attached, unless theworking out of such institutions bring the individuals of the differentclasses into actual personal contact. such intercourse is the very breathof life. a working man can hardly be made to feel and know how muchhis employer may have laboured in his study at plans for the benefit ofhis workpeople. a complete plan emerges like a piece of machinery,apparently fitted for every emergency. but the hands accept it as theydo machinery, without understanding the intense mental labour andforethought required to bring it to such perfection. but i would take anidea, the working out of which would necessitate personal intercourse;it might not go well at first, but at every hitch interest would be felt byan increasing number of men, and at last its success in working come tobe desired by all, as all had borne a part in the formation of the plan;and even then i am sure that it would lose its vitality, cease to be living,as soon as it was no longer carried on by that sort of common interestwhich invariably makes people find means and ways of seeing eachother, and becoming acquainted with each others\" characters andpersons, and even tricks of temper and modes of speech. we shouldunderstand each other better, and i\"ll venture to say we should like each
　　other more.\"
　　\"and you think they may prevent the recurrence of strikes?\"
　　\"not at all. my utmost expectation only goes so far as this--that theymay render strikes not the bitter, venomous sources of hatred they havehitherto been. a more hopeful man might imagine that a closer andmore genial intercourse between classes might do away with strikes.
　　but i am not a hopeful man.\"
　　suddenly, as if a new idea had struck him, he crossed over to wheremargaret was sitting, and began, without preface, as if he knew she hadbeen listening to all that had passed:
　　\"miss hale, i had a round-robin from some of my men--i suspect inhiggins\" handwriting--stating their wish to work for me, if ever i was ina position to employ men again on my own behalf. that was good,wasn\"t it?\"
　　\"yes. just right. i am glad of it,\" said margaret, looking up straight intohis face with her speaking eyes, and then dropping them under hiseloquent glance. he gazed back at her for a minute, as if he did notknow exactly what he was about. then sighed; and saying, \"i knew youwould like it,\" he turned away, and never spoke to her again until he bidher a formal \"good night.\"
　　as mr. lennox took his departure, margaret said, with a blush that shecould not repress, and with some hesitation,\"can i speak to you to-morrow? i want your help about--something.\"
　　\"certainly. i will come at whatever time you name. you cannot give mea greater pleasure than by making me of any use. at eleven? very well.\"
　　his eye brightened with exultation. how she was learning to dependupon him! it seemed as if any day now might give him the certainty,without having which he had determined never to offer to her again.
www、mdwenxue.com  www.7wenxue.com　  



第177章 CHAPTER XXVII \"PACK CLOUDS AWAY\"(1)


　　\"for joy or grief, for hope or fear,for all hereafter, as for here,in peace or strife, in storm or shine.\"
　　anon.
　　edith went about on tip-toe, and checked sholto in all loud speakingthat next morning, as if any sudden noise would interrupt theconference that was taking place in the drawing-room. two o\"clockcame; and they still sate there with closed doors. then there was aman\"s footstep running down stairs; and edith peeped out of thedrawing-room.
　　\"well, henry?\" said she, with a look of interrogation.
　　\"well!\" said he, rather shortly.
　　\"come in to lunch!\"
　　\"no, thank you, i can\"t. i\"ve lost too much time here already.\"
　　\"then it\"s not all settled,\" said edith despondingly.
　　\"no! not at all. it never will be settled, if the \"it\" is what i conjectureyou mean. that will never be, edith, so give up thinking about it.\"
　　\"but it would be so nice for us all,\" pleaded edith. \"i should always feelcomfortable about the children, if i had margaret settled down near me.
　　as it is, i am always afraid of her going off to cadiz.\"
　　\"i will try, when i marry, to look out for a young lady who has aknowledge of the management of children. that is all i can do. misshale would not have me. and i shall not ask her.\"
　　\"then, what have you been talking about?\"
　　\"a thousand things you would not understand: investments, and leases,and value of land.\"
　　\"oh, go away if that\"s all. you and she will be unbearably stupid, ifyou\"ve been talking all this time about such weary things.\"
　　\"very well. i\"m coming again to-morrow, and bringing mr. thorntonwith me, to have some more talk with miss hale.\"
　　\"mr. thornton! what has he to do with it?\"
　　\"he is miss hale\"s tenant,\" said mr. lennox, turning away. \"and hewishes to give up his lease.\"
　　\"oh! very well. i can\"t understand details, so don\"t give them me.\"
　　\"the only detail i want you to understand is, to let us have the backdrawing-room undisturbed, as it was to-day. in general, the children andservants are so in and out, that i can never get any businesssatisfactorily explained; and the arrangements we have to make tomorroware of importance.\"
　　no one ever knew why mr. lennox did not keep to his appointment onthe following day. mr. thornton came true to his time; and, afterkeeping him waiting for nearly an hour, margaret came in looking verywhite and anxious.
　　she began hurriedly:
　　\"i am so sorry mr. lennox is not here,--he could have done it so much
　　better than i can. he is my adviser in this\"---\"
　　i am sorry that i came, if it troubles you. shall i go to mr. lennox\"schambers and try and find him?\"
　　\"no, thank you. i wanted to tell you, how grieved i was to find that i amto lose you as a tenant. but, mr. lennox says, things are sure tobrighten\"---\"
　　mr. lennox knows little about it,\" said mr. thornton quietly. \"happyand fortunate in all a man cares for, he does not understand what it is tofind oneself no longer young--yet thrown back to the starting-pointwhich requires the hopeful energy of youth--to feel one half of lifegone, and nothing done--nothing remaining of wasted opportunity, butthe bitter recollection that it has been. miss hale, i would rather nothear mr. lennox\"s opinion of my affairs. those who are happy andsuccessful themselves are too apt to make light of the misfortunes ofothers.\"




第178章 CHAPTER XXVII \"PACK CLOUDS AWAY\"(2)


　　\"you are unjust,\" said margaret, gently. \"mr. lennox has only spoken ofthe great probability which he believes there to be of your redeeming-yourmore than redeeming what you have lost--don\"t speak till i haveended--pray don\"t!\" and collecting herself once more, she went onrapidly turning over some law papers, and statements of accounts in atrembling hurried manner. \"oh! here it is! and--he drew me out aproposal--i wish he was here to explain it--showing that if you wouldtake some money of mine, eighteen thousand and fifty-seven pounds,lying just at this moment unused in the bank, and bringing me in onlytwo and a half per cent.--you could pay me much better interest, andmight go on working marlborough mills.\" her voice had cleared itselfand become more steady. mr. thornton did not speak, and she went onlooking for some paper on which were written down the proposals forsecurity; for she was most anxious to have it all looked upon in the lightof a mere business arrangement, in which the principal advantagewould be on her side. while she sought for this paper, her very heart-pulse was arrested by the tone in which mr. thornton spoke. his voicewas hoarse, and trembling with tender passion, as he said:-\"
　　margaret!\"
　　for an instant she looked up; and then sought to veil her luminous eyesby dropping her forehead on her hands. again, stepping nearer, hebesought her with another tremulous eager call upon her name.
　　\"margaret!\"
　　still lower went the head; more closely hidden was the face, almostresting on the table before her. he came close to her. he knelt by herside, to bring his face to a level with her ear; and whispered-panted outthe words:-\"
　　take care.--if you do not speak--i shall claim you as my own in some
　　strange presumptuous way.--send me away at once, if i must go;-margaret!--\"
　　at that third call she turned her face, still covered with her small whitehands, towards him, and laid it on his shoulder, hiding it even there; andit was too delicious to feel her soft cheek against his, for him to wish tosee either deep blushes or loving eyes. he clasped her close. but theyboth kept silence. at length she murmured in a broken voice:
　　\"oh, mr. thornton, i am not good enough!\"
　　\"not good enough! don\"t mock my own deep feeling of unworthiness.\"
　　after a minute or two, he gently disengaged her hands from her face,and laid her arms as they had once before been placed to protect himfrom the rioters.
　　\"do you remember, love?\" he murmured. \"and how i requited you withmy insolence the next day?\"
　　\"i remember how wrongly i spoke to you,--that is all.\"
　　\"look here! lift up your head. i have something to show you!\" sheslowly faced him, glowing with beautiful shame.
　　\"do you know these roses?\" he said, drawing out his pocket-book, inwhich were treasured up some dead flowers.
　　\"no!\" she replied, with innocent curiosity. \"did i give them to you?\"
　　\"no! vanity; you did not. you may have worn sister roses veryprobably.\"
　　she looked at them, wondering for a minute, then she smiled a little asshe said-\"
　　they are from helstone, are they not? i know the deep indentationsround the leaves. oh! have you been there? when were you there?\"
　　\"i wanted to see the place where margaret grew to what she is, even atthe worst time of all, when i had no hope of ever calling her mine. iwent there on my return from havre.\"
　　\"you must give them to me,\" she said, trying to take them out of hishand with gentle violence.
　　\"very well. only you must pay me for them!\"
　　\"how shall i ever tell aunt shaw?\" she whispered, after some time ofdelicious silence.
　　\"let me speak to her.\"
　　\"oh, no! i owe to her,--but what will she say?\"
　　\"i can guess. her first exclamation will be, \"that man!\"\"
　　\"hush!\" said margaret, \"or i shall try and show you your mother\"sindignant tones as she says, \"that woman!\"\"
　　(1855)
下 /书 网

 