《最后一片叶》查看《最后一片叶》书评和最新更新以及相关书籍推荐请到《最后一片叶》专题网址http:///waiguo/7640/ 
  提供经典的文学名著、武侠小说、言情小说、人文社科类书籍在线阅读，所有TXT电子书手机免费下载阅读，我们提供给您的小说不求最多，但求最经典最完整



第1章 最后一片叶欧·亨利 (1)


　　the last leaf
　　o. henry
　　in a little district west of washington square the streets have run crazy and broken themselves into small strips called “places”. these “places” make strange angles and curves. one street crosses itself a time or two. an artist once discovered a valuable possibility in this street. suppose a collector with a bill for paints, paper and canvas should, in traversing this route, suddenly meet himself coming back, without a cent having been paid on account！
　　so, to quaint old greenwich village the art people soon came prowling, hunting for north windows and eighteenth-century gables and dutch attics and low rents. then they imported some pewter mugs and a chafing dish or two from sixth avenue, and became a “colony”.
　　at the top of a squatty, three-story brick sue and johnsy had their studio. “johnsy” was familiar for joanna. one was from maine; the other from california. they had met at the table d'hote of an eighth street “delmonico’s”, and found their tastes in art, chicory salad and bishop sleeves so congenial that the joint studio resulted.
　　that was in may. in november a cold, unseen stranger, whom the doctors called pneumonia, stalked about the colony, touching one here and there with his icy fingers. over on the east side this ravager strode boldly, smiting his victims by scores, but his feet trod slowly through the maze of the narrow and moss-grown “places”.
　　mr. pneumonia was not what you would call a chivalric old gentleman. a mite of a little woman with blood thinned by california zephyrs was hardly fair game for the red-fisted, short-breathed old duffer. but johnsy she smote; and she lay, scarcelymoving, on her painted iron bedstead, looking through the small dutch window-panes at the blank side of the next brick house.
　　one morning the busy doctor invited sue into the hallway with a shaggy, gray eyebrow.
　　“she has one chance in—let us say, ten,” he said, as he shook down the mercury in his clinical thermometer. “and that chance is for her to want to live. this way people have of lining-up on the side of the undertaker makes the entire pharmacopoeia look silly. your little lady has made up her mind that she’s not going to get well. has she anything on her mind?”
　　“she —she wanted to paint the bay of naples some day.” said sue.
　　“paint? —bosh！ has she anything on her mind worth thinking ablut twice —a man for instance?”
　　“a man?” said sue, with a jew’s-harp twang in her voice. “is a man worth—but, no, doctor; there is nothing of the kind.”
　　“well, it is the weakness, then,” said the doctor. “i will do all that science, so far as it may filter through my efforts, can accomplish. but whenever my patient begins to count the carriages in her funeral procession i subtract 50 percent from the curative power of medicines. if you will get her to ask one question about the new winter styles in cloak sleeves i will promise you a one-in-five chance for her, instead of one in ten.”
　　after the doctor had gone sue went into the workroom and cried a japanese napkin to a pulp. then she swaggered into johnsy’s room with her drawing board, whistling ragtime.
　　johnsy lay, scarcely making a ripple under the bedclothes, with her face toward the window. sue stopped whistling, thinking she was asleep.
　　she arranged her board and began a pen-and-ink drawing to illustrate a magazine story. young artists must pave their way to art by drawing pictures for magazine stories that young authors write to pave their way to literature.
　　as sue was sketching a pair of elegant horseshow riding trousers and a monocle on the figure of the hero, an idaho cowboy, she heard a low sound, several times repeated. she went quickly to the bedside.
　　johnsy’s eyes were open wide. she was looking out the window and counting—counting backward.
　　“twelve,” she said, and little later “eleven”; and then “ten,” and “nine”; and then “eight” and “seven”, almost together.
　　sue look solicitously out of the window. what was there to count? there was only a bare, dreary yard to be seen, and the blank side of the brick house twenty feet away. an old, old ivy vine, gnarled and decayed at the roots, climbed half way up the brick wall. the cold breath of autumn had stricken its leaves from the vine until its skeleton branches clung, almost bare, to the crumbling bricks.
　　“what is it, dear?” asked sue.
　　“six,” said johnsy, in almost a whisper. “they’re falling faster now. three days ago there were almost a hundred. it made my head ache to count them. but now it’s easy. there goes another one. there are only five left now.”
　　“five what, dear? tell your sudie.”
　　“leaves. on the ivy vine. when the last one falls i must go, too. i’ve known that for three days. didn’t the doctor tell you?”
　　“oh, i never heard of such nonsense,” complained sue, with magnificent scorn. “what have old ivy leaves to do with your getting well? and you used to love that vine so, you naughty girl. don’t be a goosey. why, the doctor told me this morning that your chances for getting well real soon were — let’s see exactly what he said—he said the chances were ten to one！ why, that’s almost as good a chance as we have in new york when we ride on the streetcars or walk past a new building. try to take some broth now, and let sudie go back to her drawing, so she can sell the editor man with it, and buy port wine for her sick child, and pork chops for her greedy self.”
　　“you needn’t get any more wine,” said johnsy, keeping her eyes fixed out the window. “there goes another. no, i don’t want any broth. that leaves just four. i want to see the last one fall before it gets dark. then i’ll go, too.”
　　“johnsy, dear,” said sue, bending over her, “will you promise me to keep your eyes closed, and not look out the window until i am done working? i must hand those drawings in by tomorrow. i need the light, or i would draw the shade down.”
　　“couldn’t you draw in the other room?” asked johnsy, coldly.
　　“i’d rather be here by you,” said sue. “beside, i don’t want you to keep looking at those silly ivy leaves.”
www.7wenxue.com  



第2章 最后一片叶欧·亨利 (2)


　　“tell me as soon as you have finished,” said johnsy, closing her eyes, and lying white and still as fallen statue, “because i want to see the last one fall. i’m tired of waiting. i’m tired of thinking. i want to turn loose my hold on everything, and go sailing down, down, just like one of those poor, tired leaves.”
　　“try to sleep,” said sue. “i must call behrman up to be my model for the old hermit miner. i’ll not be gone a minute. don’t try to move ’til i come back.”
　　old behrman was a painter who lived on the ground floor beneath them. he was past sixty and had a michael angelo’s moses beard curling down from the head of a satyr along  the body of an imp. behrman was a failure in art. forty years he had wielded the brush without getting near enough to touch the hem of his mistress’s robe. he had been always about to paint a masterpiece, but had never yet begun it. for several years he had painted nothing except now and then a daub in the line of commerce or advertising. he earned a little by serving as a model to those young artists in the colony who could not pay the price of a professional. he drank gin to excess, and still talked of his coming masterpiece. for the rest he was a fierce little old man, who scoffed terribly at softness in any one, and who regarded himself as especial mastiff-in-waiting to protect the two young artists in the studio above.
　　sue found behrman smelling strongly of juniper berries in his dimly lighted den below. in one corner was a blank canvas on an easel that had been waiting there for twenty-five years to receive the first line of the masterpiece. she told him of johnsy’s fancy, and how she feared she would, indeed, light and fragile as a leaf herself, float away, when her slight hold upon the world grew weaker.
　　old behrman, with his red eyes plainly streaming, shouted his contempt and derision for such idiotic imaginings.
　　“vass！” he cried. “is dere people in de world mit der foolishness to die because leafs dey drop off from a confounded vine? i haf not heard of such a thing. no, i will not bose as a model for your fool hermit-dunderhead. vy do you allow dot silly pusiness to come in der brain of her? ach, dot poor leetle miss yohnsy.”
　　“she is very ill and weak,” said sue, “and the fever has left her mind morbid and full of strange fancies. very well, mr. behrman, if you do not care to pose for me, you needn’t. but i think you are a horrid old—old flibbertigibbet.”
　　“you are just like a woman！” yelled behrman. “who said i will not bose? go on. i come mit you. for half an hour i haf peen trying to say dot i am ready to bose. gott！ dis is not any blace in which one so goot as miss yohnsy shall lie sick. some day i vill baint a masterpiece, and ve shall all go away. gott！ yes.”
　　johnsy was sleeping when they went upstairs. sue pulled the shade down to the window-sill, and motioned behrman into the other room. in there they peered out the window fearfully at the ivy vine. then they looked at each other for a moment without speaking. a persistent, cold rain was falling, mingled with snow. behrman, in his old blue shirt, took his seat as the hermit miner on an upturned kettle for a rock.
　　when sue awoke from an hour’s sleep the next morning she found johnsy with dull, wide-open eyes staring at the drawn green shade.
　　“pull it up; i want to see,” she ordered, in a whisper.
　　wearily sue obeyed.
　　but, look！ after the beating rain and fierce gusts of wind that had endured through the livelong night, there yet stood out against the brick wall one ivy leaf. it was the last one on the vine. still dark green near its stem, but with its serrated edges tinted with the yellow of dissolution and decay, it hung bravely from a branch some twenty feet above the ground.
　　“it is the last one,” said johnsy. “i thought it would surely fall during the night. i heard the wind. it will fall today, and i shall die at the same time.”
　　“dear, dear！” said sue, leaning her worn face down to the pillow, “think of me, if you won’t think of yourself. what would i do?”
　　but johnsy did not answer. the lonesomest thing in all the world is a soul when it is making ready to go on its mysterious, far journey. the fancy seemed to possess her more strongly as one by one the ties that bound her to friendship and to earth were loosed.
　　the day wore away, and even through the twilight they could see the lone ivy leaf clinging to its stem against the wall. and then, with the coming of the night the north wind was again loosed, while the rain still beat against the windows and pattered down from the low dutch eaves.
　　when it was light enough johnsy, the merciless, commanded that the shade be raised. the ivy leaf was still there.
　　johnsy lay for a long time looking at it. and then she called to sue, who was stirring her chicken broth over the gas stove.
　　“i’ve been a bad girl, sudie,” said johnsy. “something has made that last leaf stay there to show me how wicked i was. it is a sin to want to die. you may bring  me a little broth now, and some milk with a little port in it, and—no; bring me a hand-mirror first, and then pack some pillows about me, and i will sit up and watch you cook.”
　　and hour later she said:
　　“sudie, some day i hope to paint the bay of naples.”
　　the doctor came in the afternoon, and sue had an excuse to go into the hallway as he left.
　　“even chances,” said the doctor, taking sue’s thin, shaking hand in his. “with good nursing you’ll win.” and now i must see another case i have downstairs. behrman, his name is—some kind of an artist, i believe. pneumonia, too. he is an old, weak man, and the attack is acute. there is no hope for him; but he goes to the hospital today to be made more comfortable.”
　　the next day the doctor said to sue, “she’s out of danger. you’ve won. nutrition and care now—that’s all.”
　　and that afternoon sue came to the bed where johnsy lay, contentedly knitting a very blue and very useless woollen shoulder scarf, and put one arm around her, pillows and all.
  



第3章 最后一片叶欧·亨利 (3)


　　“i have something to tell you, white mouse,” she said. “mr. behrman died of pneumonia today in the hospital. he was ill only two days. the janitor found him on the morning of the first day in his room downstairs helpless with pain. his shoes and clothing were wet through and icy cold. they couldn’t imagine where he had been on such a dreadful night. and then they found a lantern, still lighted, and a ladder that had been dragged from its place, and some scattered brushes, and a palette with green and yellow colors mixed on it, and—look out the window, dear, at the last ivy leaf on the wall. didn’t you wonder why it never fluttered or moved when the wind blew? ah, darling, it’s behrman’s masterpiece—he painted it there the night that the last leaf fell.”
　　最后一片叶
　　[美国] 欧·亨利
　　欧·亨利 (1862-1910)，20世纪初美国著名短篇小说家，美国现代短篇小说创始人，批判现实主义作家，被誉为“美国的莫泊桑”。他一生极富传奇色彩，当过药房学徒、牧羊人、办事员、新闻记者、银行出纳员。1898年2月，他因贪污银行公款罪被判处五年徒刑，后提前获释。他的作品贴近百姓生活，结局往往出人意料，以“含泪微笑”的风格被誉为“美国生活的幽默百科全书”。代表作有《麦琪的礼物》《警察与赞美诗》《最后一片叶》等。
　　华盛顿广场西面的一个小区里，街道错综复杂，形成了崎岖狭长的小胡同，被称为“巷子”。这些“巷子”构成了奇怪的角和曲线。一条街道甚至会同自己交叉一两次。一位艺术家曾经发现了这条大街的可贵之处：一个人如果去收颜料、纸张和画布的账款，就会在这条大街上七转八拐后突然发现自己又绕回了原处，但依旧两手空空，未收回一文钱！
　　所以，搞艺术的人很快就都聚集到了这个古老而离奇的格林尼治村。他们四处游荡，搜寻朝北的窗子、18世纪的山墙、荷兰的阁楼和低价的房租。然后，他们从第六街区“进口”几只锡铅合金的杯子和一两个烘锅，这就成了他们的“据点”。
　　有一处低矮的三层砖瓦顶楼，那儿就是休和琼珊的画室，琼珊是乔安娜的昵称。她们一个来自缅因州，一个来自加利福尼亚。她们是在第八大街的“德尔莫尼科”的餐馆里吃饭时相遇的，发现彼此在艺术、饮食和衣着品味、趣味上都是如此相投，于是就共同创建了那家画室。
　　那是五月份的事了。到了十一月，一个冷酷、无形的生人突然闯进了这个区域，它冰冷的魔爪肆意横行——医生称之为“肺炎”。这个无情的蹂躏者在广场东面趾高气扬地肆虐，残害了很多人的生命。然而，在这个狭窄拥塞、青苔蔓生、迷宫一般的“巷子”里，它却放慢了脚步。
　　“肺炎先生”可不是你们所谓的那种具有骑士风范的老绅士。一个被加利福尼亚的西风吹得不见血色的柔弱女子哪是这个摩拳擦掌、气势汹汹的老混蛋的对手。可它还是没有放过琼珊。琼珊一动不动地躺在那张刷过油漆的铁床架上，透过荷兰式的窗格，凝望着对面砖屋空白的墙壁。
　　一天早晨，那长着乱蓬蓬灰色眉毛的大夫神色匆匆地把休叫到走廊上。
　　“听我说，她的希望只有——十分之一，”他一边说一边甩着体温表，让水银柱滑下来，“而这一线希望取决于她的求生欲望。人要是放弃了生存的念头，存心想去殡仪馆排队，那任何医药都无能为力。您这位小姐认定自己是好不了了——她有什么心事吗？”
　　“她——她想着有朝一日能去画那不勒斯海湾。”休说。
　　“画画？——胡扯!有没有值得让她一再花心思去想的事——比方说一个男人？”
　　“男人？”休像犹太的竖琴一样从鼻子里哼了一声，“男人难道值得——可是，哎，算了，大夫，根本没那回事。”
　　“哦，那么，这正是她虚弱的原因。”医生说，“我会竭尽全力，用科学所能达到的一切办法来为她治疗。可要是我的病人开始数她出殡队伍中的车辆时，那我医药的疗效就要减少百分之五十。如果你能使她对今年冬季大衣宽大袖子的新款式提个问题，我就可以向你作五分之一的保证，而非十分之一。”
　　大夫走后，休走进工作室，哭了，眼泪将把一张日式餐巾纸弄得一塌糊涂。然后，她带上画板，吹着滑稽的口哨，昂首阔步地跨进了琼珊的房间。
　　琼珊躺在被罩下面，脸对着窗子，一动不动。休以为她睡着了，赶紧停止了口哨。
　　她架起画板，开始为一本杂志上的故事作钢笔插图。青年画家必须通过为杂志社的短篇小说作插图来铺平他们通往艺术的道路，而那些短篇小说则是青年作家为使自己通往文学殿堂而铺设的。
　　休正在为小说里的主人公，一个爱达荷州的牛仔，画一条在马匹展览会上穿的高雅马裤和一柄单片眼镜。一个低低的声音传入了她的耳朵，一次又一次地重复着，她急忙来到床边。
　　琼珊双眼圆睁，盯着窗外，数着数——是倒着数的。
　　“十二，”她说，过了一会儿，“十一”。接着“十”、“九”、“八”和“七”几乎连在了一起。
　　休关切地看看窗外，那儿有什么好计算的呢?只有一个光秃秃、阴沉沉的院子，20英尺外，还有一堵砖屋的空白墙壁。一株沧桑衰老的常春藤，攀爬在砖墙的半中央，根部扭曲枯朽。寒瑟的秋风几乎扫落了藤上所有的叶子，只剩下光秃秃的枯枝虚弱地攀附在那几乎化为齑粉的砖块上。
　　“怎么了，亲爱的?”休问道。
　　“六，”琼珊说道，几乎是在耳语，“它们现在落得更快了。三天前，还有将近一百片，数起来让我头疼，可现在简单了，又落了一片，只剩五片了。”
　　“五片什么啊，亲爱的？告诉你的苏迪。”
　　“叶子，常春藤上的叶子，当最后一片落下时，我也得走了。两天前我就知道了，难道大夫没有告诉你吗？”




第4章 最后一片叶欧·亨利 (4)


　　“哦，我可从来没听过这种无稽之谈，”休极其不满地奚落道，“那老藤叶和你健康的恢复有什么关系呢？你过去一直很喜欢那株藤树，你这淘气的姑娘，别犯傻了。对了，今早大夫告诉我，你很快就会康复的——让我想想他到底是怎么说的——他说希望有百分之九十!啊，那就是说康复的可能性几乎与我们在纽约搭街车或是走过一幢新建筑物一样。来喝点儿肉汤吧，让苏迪回去作她的画吧，这样才能卖给那些编辑，来给她生病的孩子买葡萄酒，也给贪吃的自己买点儿猪排。”
　　“你没必要再买什么酒了，”琼珊说，眼睛定定地看着窗外，“又落了一片，不，我也不要什么肉汤，叶子只剩四片了。我想天黑前看到最后一片叶子落下来，那时，我也该走了。”
　　“琼珊，亲爱的，”休俯下身说，“拜托你在我画完前闭上眼睛，不要看窗外，好不好？那些画我明天必须得交。要不是需要光线，我早就把窗帘拉上了。”
　　“你不能到另一间屋子里去画吗?”琼珊冷冷地问。
　　“我宁愿呆在你这儿，”休说，“再说，我也不想你老盯着那些无聊的藤叶。”
　　“你一画完就告诉我。”琼珊闭上眼睛躺了下来。她面色苍白，一动不动，像一尊倒下的雕塑，“因为我想看到最后一片藤叶落下。我累了，不想再等了，也不愿再想了，我想摆脱一切，像那可怜的、疲惫的藤叶一样慢悠悠地飘下去，飘下去。”
　　“赶紧睡吧，”休说，“我得把贝尔曼叫上来，让他给我当那个隐居老矿工的模特，一分钟之内我是回不来的，我回来之前别乱动。”
　　老贝尔曼是一位画家，住在她们楼下底层，六十多岁，有着像米开朗基罗的雕像摩西一样的胡子，从森林之神萨迪的脑袋上沿着小鬼般的身体卷曲地垂下来。贝尔曼在艺术上是个失败者，他挥着画笔画了四十年，还不曾摸到艺术女神的裙带边儿。他总是酝酿着一幅传世经典之作，但始终也没见他动笔。几年以来，除了时不时涂抹一些商业画和广告画之外，他什么也没画过。他给那些“据点”里雇不起专职模特的青年艺术家充当模特，挣几个钱。他过量地饮用杜松子酒，不断地谈论他未来的杰作。除此之外，他还是一个脾气暴躁的小老头儿，猛烈地嘲讽任何人的温情，却甘愿做保护楼上两位青年艺术家的看门狗。
　　在楼下光线昏暗的小窝里，休找到了酒气扑鼻的贝尔曼。角落的画架上是一块空白画布，二十五年来，一直等候着迎接传世之作的线条。她把琼珊奇怪的想法告诉了他，说她是多么害怕那轻柔脆弱的琼珊会抓不住她与人世的最后一丝联系，像枯叶一样随风飘逝。
　　老贝尔曼红红的眼睛里分明涌出了泪水，他咆哮着表明他对这白痴的想法是多么地轻蔑和不屑。
　　“混帐话！”他嚷道，“世界上还会有这样的笨蛋，叶子一落就想死。我从没听过还有这种事。不，我没心情替你这傻瓜隐士当模特。咳，你怎么会叫她的脑壳生出这种愚蠢的念头呢？呵，可怜的琼珊小姐！”
　　“她病得很严重，很虚弱，”休说，“高烧让她失去了理智，她满脑子古怪的想法。好了，老贝尔曼先生，如果你不想给我当模特，我不勉强你，但我认为你是个讨人厌的老——老贫嘴。”
　　“你真是个妇人！”贝尔曼叫道，“谁说我不愿意？走啊，我陪你去。我都说老半天了愿意帮你忙。天啊！像琼珊这样的好姑娘，不该在这种地方生病啊。总有一天我会画一幅杰作，到时我们就离开这里。天啊，会的！”
　　他们上楼时，琼珊已经睡了。休把窗帘拉下，示意贝尔曼去另一间屋子。在那儿，他们忧心忡忡地看着窗外的那株常春藤，四顾无言。过了一会儿，冷雨夹着冰雪固执而持久地下着。贝尔曼穿着蓝色的旧衬衣，坐在一只倒放的作为岩石的大鼓上，装扮隐居的矿工。
　　第二天一早，休睡了一个多小时后，醒过来，发现琼珊睁大着两眼，呆呆地盯着那拉下的绿色窗帘。
　　“把窗帘拉开，我想看看。”她低声命令道。
　　休怏怏地听从了。
　　可是，看呐！经历了一夜漫长的狂风暴雨，那儿居然还有一片常春藤叶依偎在砖墙上。那是藤条上的最后一片了。靠近叶柄处是深绿的，但锯齿状的叶片边缘已经呈现出枯黄，它傲然地悬挂在离地面20英尺高的枝杈上。
　　“它是最后一片了，”琼珊说，“我想它昨晚准会掉的。我听到了风声。今天它会落下的，而那时我也就死了。”
　　“亲爱的，亲爱的！”休说着，疲倦的脸贴在枕头上，“即便你不想自己，也想想我啊。我该怎么办啊?”
　　可琼珊没有回答。世界上最孤寂的莫过于一个准备踏上神秘而遥远的死亡之旅的灵魂了。当她与友谊和尘世的纽带一点点松开时，那种幻想似乎把她抓得更紧了。
　　这一天终于捱过去了，黄昏时分，她们仍然看到那片孤零零的藤叶倚着墙壁紧紧地挂在茎上。随着夜色渐浓，北风又开始咆哮，雨点不停地敲打着窗户，雨水从低矮的荷兰式的屋檐上倾泻下来。
　　天刚蒙蒙亮，狠心的琼珊又要把窗帘拉起来。
　　那片藤叶依旧在那儿。
　　琼珊躺着，久久地注视着它。然后她开始喊休。休正在煤气炉边忙着给她熬鸡汤。
　　“休，我是个坏女孩，”琼珊说道，“某种东西让最后一片藤叶留在那儿来表明我曾经有多邪恶。想死就是罪恶。现在给我点儿肉汤，再加点带葡萄酒的牛奶，再——不，先给我拿面小镜子来，再替我把枕头垫起来，我要坐着看你煮汤。”
　　一小时后，她说：“休，我希望有朝一日能去画那不勒斯海湾。”
　　下午医生来了，在他离开时，休找了个借口跟他来到走廊。
　　“百分之五十的希望，”医生摇着休瘦弱的手说道，“好好照顾她，你会成功的。现在我得去楼下看另一个病号了，贝尔曼——他的名字好像是——我想或者是个艺术家之类的人吧，也得了肺炎。他是个年老体弱的人，病得很严重，几乎没什么希望了，不过今天还是让他进了医院，好让他过得好受些。”
　　第二天，医生告诉休：“她已经脱离危险了，你成功了。现在只需要加强营养和精心调养了。”
　　下午，休来到琼珊床边，琼珊正靠在那儿，心满意足地织一条毫无用处的深蓝色羊毛披肩，休用一只胳膊连同枕头一把搂住她。
　　“我有件事想告诉你，小白鼠，”她说，“贝尔曼先生今天在医院去世了，他得了肺病，才两天时间啊。第一天早上，看门人发现他在自己的房间里痛苦而无助地呻吟着。他的鞋子和衣服都湿透了，冰冷彻骨。谁也想不到，在那样一个可怕的夜晚他会去哪儿。后来，他们找到了一只灯笼，还依旧亮着，一架不知从哪儿拖来的梯子，几只散落的画笔，还有一块调着黄色和绿色的调色板，还有——看看窗外吧，亲爱的，看看墙上那最后一片藤叶吧。你难道不觉得奇怪，狂风大作时它居然动也不动！啊，亲爱的，它就是贝尔曼的传世之作——最后一片叶子掉落时，他把它画了上去。”




第5章 麦琪的礼物欧·亨利 (1)


　　the gift of the magi
　　o.henry
　　one dollar and eighty-seven cents. that was all. and sixty cents of it was in pennies. pennies saved one and two at a time by bulldozing the grocer and the vegetable man and the butcher until one’s cheeks burned with the silent imputation of parsimony that such close dealing implied. three times della counted it. one dollar and eighty-seven cents. and the next day would be christmas.
　　there was clearly nothing to do but flop down on the shabby little couch and howl. so della did it. which instigates the moral reflection that life is made up of sobs, sniffles, and smiles, with sniffles predominating.
　　while the mistress of the home is gradually subsiding from the first stage to the second, take a look at the home. a furnished flat at $8 per week. it did not exactly beggar description, but it certainly had that word on the lookout for the mendicancy squad.
　　in the vestibule below was a letter-box into which no letter would go, and an electric button from which no mortal finger could coax a ring. also appertaining thereunto was a card bearing the name “mr. james dillingham young.”
　　the “dillingham” had been flung to the breeze during a former period of prosperity when its possessor was being paid $30 per week. now, when the income was shrunk to $20, the letters of “dillingham” looked blurred, as though they were thinking seriously of contracting to a modest and unassuming d. but whenever mr. james dillingham young came home and reached his flat above he was called “jim” and greatly hugged by mrs. james dillingham young, already introduced to you as della. which is all very good.
　　della finished her cry and attended to her cheeks with the powder rag. she stood bythe window and looked out dully at a gray cat walking a gray fence in a gray backyard. tomorrow would be christmas day, and she had only $1.87 with which to buy jim a present. she had been saving every penny she could for months, with this result. twenty dollars a week doesn’t go far. expenses had been greater than she had calculated. they always are. only $1.87 to buy a present for jim. her jim. many a happy hour she had spent planning for something nice for him. something fine and rare and sterling—something just a little bit near to being worthy of the honor of being owned by jim.
　　there was a pier-glass between the windows of the room. perhaps you have seen a pier-glass in an $8 flat. a very thin and very agile person may, by observing his reflection in a rapid sequence of longitudinal strips, obtain a fairly accurate conception of his looks. della, being slender, had mastered the art.
　　suddenly she whirled from the window and stood before the glass. her eyes were shining brilliantly, but her face had lost its color within twenty seconds. rapidly she pulled down her hair and let it fall to its full length.
　　now, there were two possessions of the james dillingham youngs in which they both took a mighty pride. one was jim’s gold watch that had been his father’s and his grandfather’s. the other was della’s hair. had the queen of sheba lived in the flat across the airshaft, della would have let her hair hang out the window some day to dry just to depreciate her majesty’s jewels and gifts. had king solomon been the janitor, with all his treasures piled up in the basement, jim would have pulled out his watch every time he passed, just to see him pluck at his beard from envy.
　　so now della’s beautiful hair fell about her rippling and shining like a cascade of brown waters. it reached below her knee and made itself almost a garment for her. and then she did it up again nervously and quickly. once she faltered for a minute and stood still while a tear or two splashed on the worn red carpet.
　　on went her old brown jacket; on went her old brown hat. with a whirl of skirts and with the brilliant sparkle still in her eyes, she fluttered out the door and down the stairs to the street.
　　where she stopped the sign read: “mine. sofronie. hair goods of all kinds.” one flight up della ran, and collected herself, panting. madame, large, too white, chilly, hardly looked the “sofronie.”
　　“will you buy my hair？” asked della.
　　“i buy hair,” said madame. “take ye hat off and let’s have a sight at the looks of it.”
　　down rippled the brown cascade.
　　“twenty dollars,” said madame, lifting the mass with a practised hand.
　　“give it to me quick,” said della.
　　oh, and the next two hours tripped by on rosy wings. forget the hashed metaphor. she was ransacking the stores for jim’s present.
。下 书网



第6章 麦琪的礼物欧·亨利 (2)


　　she found it at last. it surely had been made for jim and no one else. there was no other like it in any of the stores, and she had turned all of them inside out. it was a platinum fob chain simple and chaste in design, properly proclaiming its value by substance alone and not by meretricious ornamentation—as all good things should do. it was even worthy of the watch. as soon as she saw it she knew that it must be jim’s. it was like him. quietness and value—the description applied to both. twenty-one dollars they took from her for it, and she hurried home with the 87 cents. with that chain on his watch jim might be properly anxious about the time in any company. grand as the watch was, he sometimes looked at it on the sly on account of the old leather strap that he used in place of a chain.
　　when della reached home her intoxication gave way a little to prudence and reason. she got out her curling irons and lighted the gas and went to work repairing the ravages made by generosity added to love. which is always a tremendous task, dear friends—a mammoth task.
　　within forty minutes her head was covered with tiny, closelying curls that made her look wonderfully like a truant schoolboy. she looked at her reflection in the mirror long, carefully, and critically.
　　“if jim doesn’t kill me,” she said to herself, “before he takes a second look at me, he’ll say i look like a coney island chorus girl. but what could i do—oh！ what could i do with a dollar and eighty-seven cents？”
　　at 7 o’clock the coffee was made and the frying-pan was on the back of the stove hot and ready to cook the chops.
　　jim was never late. della doubled the fob chain in her hand and sat on the corner of the table near the door that he always entered. then she heard his step on the stair away down on the first flight, and she turned white for just a moment. she had a habit for saying little silent prayer about the simplest everyday things, and now she whispered: “please god, make him think i am still pretty.”
　　the door opened and jim stepped in and closed it. he looked thin and very serious. poor fellow, he was only twenty-two—and to be burdened with a family！ he needed a new overcoat and he was without gloves.
　　jim stopped inside the door, as immovable as a setter at the scent of quail. his eyes were fixed upon della, and there was an expression in them that she could not read, and it terrified her. it was not anger, nor surprise, nor disapproval, nor horror, nor any of the sentiments that she had been prepared for. he simply stared at her fixedly with that peculiar expression on his face.
　　della wriggled off the table and went for him.
　　“jim, darling,” she cried, “don’t look at me that way. i had my hair cut off and sold it because i couldn’t have lived through christmas without giving you a present. it’ll grow out again—you won’t mind, will you？ i just had to do it. my hair grows awfully fast. say ’merry christmas！’ jim, and let’s be happy. you don’t know what a nice—what a beautiful, nice gift i’ve got for you.”
　　“you’ve cut off your hair？” asked jim, laboriously, as if he had not arrived at that patent fact yet even after the hardest mental labor.
　　“cut it off and sold it,” said della. “don’t you like me just as well, anyhow？ i’m me without my hair, ain’t i？”
　　jim looked about the room curiously.
　　“you say your hair is gone？” he said, with an air almost of idiocy.
　　“you needn’t look for it,” said della. “it’s sold, i tell you—sold and gone, too. it’s christmas eve, boy. be good to me, for it went for you. maybe the hairs of my head were numbered,” she went on with sudden serious sweetness, “but nobody could ever count my love for you. shall i put the chops on, jim？”
　　out of his trance jim seemed quickly to wake. he enfolded his della. for ten seconds let us regard with discreet scrutiny some inconsequential object in the other direction. eight dollars a week or a million a year—what is the difference？ a mathematician or a wit would give you the wrong answer. the magi brought valuable gifts, but that was not among them. this dark assertion will be illuminated later on.
　　jim drew a package from his overcoat pocket and threw it upon the table.
　　“don’t make any mistake, dell,” he said, “about me. i don’t think there’s anything in the way of a haircut or a shave or a shampoo that could make me like my girl any less. but if you’ll unwrap that package you may see why you had me going a while at first.”
　　white fingers and nimble tore at the string and paper. and then an ecstatic scream of joy; and then, alas！ a quick feminine change to hysterical tears and wails, necessitating the immediate employment of all the comforting powers of the lord of the flat.
　　for there lay the combs—the set of combs, side and back, that della had worshipped for long in a broadway window. beautiful combs, pure tortoise shell, with jewelled rims—just the shade to wear in the beautiful vanished hair. they were expensive combs, she knew, and her heart had simply craved and yearned over them without the least hope of possession. and now, they were hers, but the tresses that should have adorned the coveted adornments were gone.
　　but she hugged them to her bosom, and at length she was able to look up with dim eyes and a smile and say: “my hair grows so fast, jim！”
　　and then della leaped up like a little singed cat and cried, “oh, oh！”
　　jim had not yet seen his beautiful present. she held it out to him eagerly upon her open palm. the dull precious metal seemed to flash with a reflection of her bright and ardent spirit.
/



第7章 麦琪的礼物欧·亨利 (3)


　　“isn’t it a dandy, jim？ i hunted all over town to find it. you’ll have to look at the time a hundred times a day now. give me your watch. i want to see how it looks on it.”
　　instead of obeying, jim tumbled down on the couch and put his hands under the back of his head and smiled.
　　“dell,” said he, “let’s put our christmas presents away and keep ’em a while. they’re too nice to use just at present. i sold the watch to get the money to buy your combs. and now suppose you put the chops on.”
　　the magi, as you know, were wise men—wonderfully wise men—who brought gifts to the babe in the manger. they invented the art of giving christmas presents. being wise, their gifts were no doubt wise ones, possibly bearing the privilege of exchange in case of duplication. and here i have lamely related to you the uneventful chronicle of two foolish children in a flat who most unwisely sacrificed for each other the greatest treasures of their house. but in a last word to the wise of these days let it be said that of all who give gifts these two were the wisest. of all who give and receive gifts, such as they are wisest. everywhere they are wisest. they are the magi.
　　麦琪的礼物
　　[美国] 欧·亨利
　　一美元八十七美分，这是全部的积蓄了，其中还有六十美分是一分一分的硬币。这些硬币都是在杂货店老板、菜贩子和肉店老板那儿软磨硬泡一分两分抠下来的。这种过分吝啬地讨价还价简直丢尽颜面。黛拉反反复复数了三次，还是一美元八十七美分，而第二天就是圣诞节了。
　　显然，她只有扑倒在破旧的小睡椅上抱头痛哭的份儿了，黛拉就这样哭着，不禁感慨万分：生活就是哭泣、抽噎和微笑，而哭泣占据着统治地位。
　　当这位女主人逐渐从悲伤中平静下来，让我们来看看这个家吧。一套带家具的公寓，每周租金八美元。尽管还不能用乞丐这个词来形容，可比贫民窟也好不了多少。
　　楼下的门道里有个信箱，可里面从没装过信；一个电钮，至今也没看见谁用手指按响过它；还有一张名片，上面写着“詹姆斯·迪林厄姆·扬先生”。
　　“迪林厄姆”是主人先前春风得意之际一时兴起加上去的，那时他一周能挣三十美元。现在，他的收入缩减到二十美元，而那些字母也似乎严肃地思索着是否缩减为谦逊而讲求实际的字母d。可是，每当詹姆斯·迪林厄姆·扬回家走上他的小楼时，詹姆斯·迪林厄姆·扬太太，也就是刚才介绍给诸位的黛拉，总是热烈地拥抱他，叫他“吉姆”。这时，一切再好不过了。
　　黛拉哭完了，往脸上涂了点粉。她站在窗前，呆呆地望着窗外灰蒙蒙的后院，一只灰猫正沿着灰色的篱笆走着。明天就是圣诞节了，可她只有一美元八十七美分为吉姆买礼物。几个月来她尽了最大努力，才一分一分地积攒了这点钱，二十美元要花一周实在是不够，花费的总比预算的多。只有一美元八十七美分给吉姆买礼物。她的吉姆啊，她曾经花费了多少幸福的时光筹划着送他一件美好的礼物啊！一件精巧、希奇而又珍贵的礼物，至少要配得上她的吉姆才行。
　　房间的两扇窗子之间有一面穿衣镜，你也许见过每周租金八美元的公寓的壁镜吧，非常单薄而灵巧的人才有可能从一连串纵影长条里得到自己容貌的概念。黛拉身材苗条，早已掌握了这门照镜子的艺术。
　　突然，她从窗前转过身来，站在镜子前，两眼闪动着晶莹的光芒，可不到二十秒钟就黯然失色了。她迅速解开头发，让它披散下来。
　　目前，詹姆斯·迪林厄姆·扬家有两件令主人引以为豪的东西：一件是吉姆的金表，那是他祖父传给父亲，父亲又传给他的；另一件则是黛拉的秀发。如果示巴女王住在天井对面的公寓里，总有一天，黛拉会将秀发披开露于窗外晾晒，那会令女王的所有珠宝黯然失色；如果地下室堆满财宝，而所罗门又是守门人，吉姆要是每次路过那儿时掏出金表，所罗门准会嫉妒得吹胡子瞪眼。
　　而此刻，黛拉那美丽的秀发飘散下来，波浪起伏，熠熠生辉，宛如一道褐色的瀑布。那秀发一直垂到膝下，恰似一条长裙。随后，她迅速而紧张地把头发梳好。她犹豫着，静静地站在那里，眼泪一滴两滴地溅落在那破旧的红地毯上。
　　她披上那件褐色的旧外套，戴上褐色的旧帽子，眼中还残留着晶莹的泪花。她裙子一摆，飘然出门，下楼来到街上。
　　她在一块招牌前停下了脚步，那招牌上写着“索佛罗尼夫人——专营各式头发”。黛拉跑上楼梯，喘息着定了定神。那位夫人身材肥硕，面色苍白，冷若冰霜，与“索佛罗尼”的雅称极不相称。
　　“你买我的头发吗？”黛拉问。
　　“买，”那夫人说，“把帽子摘下来，先让我看看。”
　　起伏的褐色瀑布一泻而下。
　　“二十美元。”那夫人边说边内行地捋起那缕秀发。
　　“快给我钱。”黛拉说。
　　啊，接下来的两个小时有如长了玫瑰色的翅膀，愉快地飞逝而过——别理会这胡诌的比喻了——她正搜罗着各家商店，忙着为吉姆买礼物呢。
　　她终于找到了！那简直是专门为吉姆量身定做的！她跑遍了所有商店，哪儿也没有这样的东西。那是一条白金怀表手链，镂刻着花纹，朴素而高雅——正如一切好的东西，毫无俗艳的装饰，仅凭本身的质量——正配得上那块金表。她一见那条表链就知道它属于吉姆，它就像吉姆本人，儒雅而高贵——这形容用于两者都很合适。二十一美元，她买下了，拿了剩下的八十七美分匆匆赶回家。只要金表配上这条链子，无论在什么场合，吉姆都可以毫无顾虑地看时间了。尽管那表华贵，但表链是用旧皮带代替的，所以有时他只能羞愧而匆忙地瞥上一眼。
　　回家后，黛拉的狂喜变得有点儿谨慎和理智了。她找出烫发钳，点燃煤气炉，开始补救因为爱情和慷慨造成的毁坏。这通常是一项惊人的工作，亲爱的朋友——简直是件了不起的工程。
　　不到四十分钟，她的头上就布满了细小而紧贴头皮的卷发，使她活像个逃学的男孩儿。她仔细而挑剔地长时间看着镜中的自己。
　　“看吉姆不把我杀掉，他要是瞅上我一眼的话！”她自言自语道，“他准会说我像科尼岛上歌舞团里卖唱的姑娘。但我有什么办法呢——唉，一美元八十七美分能做什么呢！”
　　七点钟时咖啡煮好了，煎锅也放在炉子上热着，随时准备煎牛排。
　　吉姆一贯准时回家。黛拉手里握着对折的表链，坐在门口吉姆进来时必经的桌角上。随后，她听到楼梯上传来他的脚步声，她紧张得脸色苍白。她习惯于为日常琐事默默祈祷，这时，她低声默念：“上帝啊，求你让他认为我还是那样漂亮吧！”
　　门开了，吉姆迈步进来，随手把门关上，他看起来很瘦削，又非常严肃。可怜的人，才二十二岁，却要承担一个家庭的重任！他该买件新大衣了，而他连副手套都没有。
　　吉姆站在门口，像猎犬嗅到了鹌鹑的气味，一动不动。他盯着黛拉，神情不可琢磨，令她毛骨悚然。那不是愤怒，也不是惊讶，又不是不满，更不是厌恶，全然不是她预料中的任何一种表情。他只是带着这种怪怪的神情怔怔地盯着她。
　　黛拉一扭腰，从桌子上跳下来，向他走去。
　　“吉姆，亲爱的，”她叫道，“别那样看着我，我把头发剪掉卖了，因为不送你一件礼物我无法过圣诞节。它还会长出来的，你不会介意的，是吗？我只能这么做了，我的头发长得非常非常快，快说圣诞快乐吧，吉姆！让我们快快乐乐的。你肯定猜不出我给你买了一件多漂亮多精美的礼物！”
　　“你已经把头发剪了？”吉姆吃力地问，似乎绞尽脑汁也没弄明白眼前的事实。
　　“剪掉了，卖了，”黛拉说，“但无论如何，你仍会喜欢我的。没有头发，我也还是我啊，不是吗？”
　　吉姆神情古怪，四下张望。
　　“你是说你的头发没了？”他几乎白痴似地问道。
　　“不用找了，”黛拉说，“已经卖掉了，告诉你，我已经卖掉了，没有啦。今晚是圣诞夜，乖乖，对我好一些，这是为了你呀。也许我的头发数得清，”她突然用一种严肃而温柔的语气继续说，“但是我对你的爱没有人能数得清。让我把牛排放进锅里好吗，吉姆？”
　　吉姆好像突然从恍惚中惊醒过来，一把把他的黛拉揽在怀里。别急，先让我们花十秒钟从另一个角度审慎地思索一下某些微不足道的小事吧。房租每周八元，还是每年一百万元——这又有什么差别呢？数学家或是智者给的答案也许是错误的。麦琪带来了珍贵的礼物，但是缺少了那件东西——这句晦涩的话，后文将有所交代。
　　吉姆从大衣口袋里掏出一个小包，扔在桌上。
　　“别误会我，黛拉，”他说，“无论长发短发，修面还是洗头，都丝毫不能减少我对妻子的爱。可如果你打开那个包，你就会明白刚才我为什么那么吃惊！”
　　她白皙的手指轻巧地解开绳子，打开纸包，紧接着是一声欣喜若狂的尖叫，哎呀！然后突然变成了女性神经质的泪水和哭泣，男主人只得千方百计来抚慰了。
　　因为那儿放着的是梳子——一套梳子啊，鬓梳，后梳，一应俱全。那是很久以前黛拉在百老汇的橱窗里见过并渴望已久的东西。这些美丽的发梳是用纯玳瑁制成的，用珠宝镶着边儿——颜色正好与她失去的秀发相配。她明白，这套梳子很昂贵，而她仅仅是羡慕，从未奢望过据为已有。现在，这一切居然属于自己了！可那对此渴望已久的秀发却已经不见踪影了。
　　但她依然把梳子紧紧贴在胸前，好一会儿，她才抬起迷蒙的泪眼，微笑着说：“我的头发长得飞快，吉姆！”
　　接着，黛拉跳起来，像只被烫着的小猫，叫着，“哦，哦！”
　　吉姆还没有见着他那精美的礼物呢。她急切地把手摊开伸向他。那没有知觉的贵重金属似乎也反射着她那欢快而炽热的心。
　　“漂亮极了，不是吗，吉姆？我搜遍全城才找到它。现在，你可以每天看上一百次时间了。快把手表给我，我要看看它们配在一起是什么样子。”
　　吉姆并没照做，而是倒在旧睡椅上，头枕双手，微笑着。
　　“黛拉，”他说，“让我们把圣诞礼物放到一边保存一会儿吧。它们实在太好了，可现在派不上什么用场。我把金表卖了，给你买了发梳。现在，你做牛排吧。”
　　众所周知，麦琪是位智者——智慧超群——他们把礼物带给出生在马槽里的耶稣，从而开始了圣诞节赠送礼物的习俗。因为他们是智者，毫无疑问，他们的礼物也是明智的，如果两样东西完全一样，还可能有交换的权利。在这里，我用笨拙之笔向诸位讲述了公寓套间里两个傻孩子平淡无奇的故事，他们极不明智地为对方牺牲了自己最宝贵的东西。不过，让我对如今的聪明人说一句话，在一切赠送礼物的人当中，他们两个是最聪明的。在一切馈赠又接受礼品的人当中，像他俩那样的人也是最聪明的。无论在任何地方，他俩都是最聪明的，他们就是麦琪。




第8章 卡拉维拉县有名的跳蛙 马克·吐温 (1)


　　the notorious jumping frog of calaveras county
　　mark twain
　　in compliance with the request of a friend of mine, who wrote me from the east, i called on good-natured, garrulous old simon wheeler, and inquired after my friend’s friend, leonidas w. smiley, as requested to do, and i hereunto append the result. i have a lurking suspicion that leonidas w. smiley is a myth; that my friend never knew such a personage; and that he only conjectured that if i asked old wheeler about him, it would remind him of his infamous jim smiley, and he would go to work and bore me to death with some exasperating reminiscence of him as long and as tedious as it should be useless to me. if that was the design, it succeeded.
　　i found simon wheeler dozing comfortably by the barroom stove of the dilapidated tavern in the decayed mining camp of angel’s, and i noticed that he was fat and bald-headed, and had an expression of winning gentleness and simplicity upon his tranquil countenance. he roused up, and gave me good day. i told him a friend of mine had commissioned me to make some inquiries about a cherished companion of his boyhood named leonidas w. smiley—rev. leonidas w. smiley, a young minister of the gospel, who he had heard was at one time a resident of angel’s camp. i added that if mr. wheeler could tell me anything about this rev. leonidas w. smiley, i would feel under many obligations to him.
　　simon wheeler backed me into a corner and blockaded me there with his chair, and then sat down and reeled off the monotonous narrative which follows this paragraph. he never smiled, he never frowned, he never changed his voice from the gentle-flowing key to which he tuned his initial sentence, he never betrayed the slightest suspicion of enthusiasm; but all through the interminable narrative there ran a vein of impressive earnestness and sincerity, which showed me plainly that, so far from his imagining that there was anything ridiculous or funny about his story, he regarded it as a really important matter, and admired its two heroes as men of transcendent genius in finesse. i let him go on in his own way, and never interrrupted him once.
　　“rev. leonidas w. h’m, reverend le—well, there was a feller here once by the name of jim smiley, in the winter of 49—or may be it was the spring of ’50—i don’t recollect exactly, somehow, though what makes me think it was one or the other is because i remember the big flume warn’t finished when he first come to the camp; but anyway, he was the curiousest man about always betting on anything that turned up you ever see, if he could get anybody to bet on the other side; and if he couldn’t he’d change sides. any way that suited the other man would suit him—any way just so’s he got a bet, he was satisfied. but still he was lucky, uncommon lucky; he most always come out winner. he was always ready and laying for a chance; there couldn’t be no solit’ry thing mentioned but that feller’d offer to bet on it, and take any side you please, as i was just telling you. if there was a horse-race, you’d find him flush or you’d find him busted at the end of it; if there was a dog-fight, he’d bet on it; if there was a cat-fight, he’d bet on it; if there was a chicken-fight, he’d bet on it; why, if there was two birds setting on a fence, he would bet you which one would fly first; or if there was a camp-meeting, he would be there reg’lar to bet on parson walker, which he judged to be the best exhorter about here, and so he was too, and a good man. if he even see a straddle-bug start to go anywheres, he would bet you how long it would take him to get to—to wherever he was going to, and if you took him up, he would foller that straddle-bug to mexico but what he would find out where he was bound for and how long he was on the road. lots of the boys here has seen that smiley, and can tell you about him. why, it never made no difference to him—he’d bet on anything—the dangdest feller. parson walker’s wife laid very sick once, for a good while, and it seemed as if they warn’t going to save her; but one morning he come in, and smiley up and asked him how she was, and he said she was considable better—thank the lord for his inf ’nit mercy—and coming on so smart that with the blessing of prov’dence she’d get well yet; and smiley, before he thought, says, ’well, i’ll resk two-and-a-half she don’t anyway.’
　　“thish-yer smiley had a mare—the boys called her the fifteen-minute nag, but that was only in fun, you know, because of course she was faster than that—and he used to win money on that horse, for all she was so slow and always had the asthma, or the distemper, or the consumption, or something of that kind. they used to give her two or three hundred yards’ start, and then pass her under way; but always at the fag end of the race she’d get excited and desperate like, and come cavorting and straddling up, and scattering her legs around limber, sometimes in the air, and sometimes out to one side among the fences, and kicking up m-o-r-e dust and raising m-o-r-e racket with her coughing and sneezing and blowing her nose—and always fetch up at the stand just about a neck ahead, as near as you could cipher it down.
/



第9章 卡拉维拉县有名的跳蛙 马克·吐温 (2)


　　“and he had a little small bull-pup, that to look at him you’d think he warn’t worth a cent but to set around and look ornery and lay for a chance to steal something. but as soon as money was up on him he was a different dog; his under-jaw’d begin to stick out like the fo’castle of a steamboat, and his teeth would uncover and shine like the furnaces. and a dog might tackle him and bully-rag him, and bite him, and throw him over his shoulder two or three times, and andrew jackson—which was the name of the pup—andrew jackson would never let on but what he was satisfied, and hadn’t expected nothing else—and the bets being doubled and doubled on the other side all the time, till the money was all up; and then all of a sudden he would grab that other dog jest by the j’int of his hind leg and freeze to it—not chaw, you understand, but only just grip and hang on till they throwed up the sponge, if it was a year. smiley always come out winner on that pup, till he harnessed a dog once that didn’t have no hind legs, because they’d been sawed off in a circular saw, and when the thing had gone along far enough, and the money was all up, and he come to make a snatch for his pet holt, he see in a minute how he’ds been imposed on, and how the other dog had him in the door, so to speak, and he ’peared surprised, and then he looked sorter discouraged-like, and didn’t try no more to win the fight, and so he got shucked out bad. he give smiley a look, as much as to say his heart was broke, and it was his fault, for putting up a dog that hadn’t no hind legs for him to take holt of, which was his main dependence in a fight, and then he limped off a piece and laid down and died. it was a good pup, was that andrew jackson, and would have made a name for himself if he’d lived, for the stuff was in him and he had genius—i know it, because he hadn’t noopportunities to speak of, and it don’t stand to reason that a dog could make such a fight as he could under them circumstances if he hadn’t no talent. it always makes me feel sorry when i think of that last fight of his’n, and the way it turned out.
　　“well, thish-yer smiley had rat-tarriers, and chicken cocks, and tomcats and all them kind of things, till you couldn’t rest, and you couldn’t fetch nothing for him to bet on but he’d match you. he fetched a frog one day, and took him home, and said he cal’lated to educate him; and so he never done nothing for three months but set in his back yard and learn that frog to jump. and you bet you he did learn him, too. he’d give him a little punch behind, and the next minute you’d see that frog whirling in the air like a doughnut—see him turn one summerset, or may be a couple, if he got a good start, and come down flat-footed and all right, like a cat. he got him up so in the matter of fetching flies, and kep him in practice so constant, that he’d nail a fly every time as fur as he could see him. smiley said all a frog wanted was education, and he could do ’most anything—and i believe him. why, i’ve seen him set dan’l webster down here on this floor—dan’l webster was the name of the frog—and sing out, flies, dan’l, flies！’ and quicker’n you could wink he’d spring straight up and snake a fly off’n the counter there, and flop down on the floor ag’in as solid as a gob of mud, and fall to scratching the side of his head with his hind foot as indifferent as if he hadn’t no idea he’d been doin’ any more’n any frog might do. you never see a frog so modest and straightfor’ard as he was, for all he was so gifted. and when it come to fair and square jumping on a dead level, he could get over more ground at one straddle than any animal of his breed you ever see. jumping on a dead level was his strong suit, you understand; and when it come to that, smiley would ante up money on him as long as he had a red. smiley was monstrous proud of his frog, and well he might be, for fellers that had traveled and been everywheres all said he laid over any frog that ever they see.
　　“well, smiley kep’ the beast in a little lattice box, and he used to fetch him down- town sometimes and lay for a bet. one day a feller—a stranger in the camp, he was—come acrost him with his box, and says:
　　“what might it be that you’ve got in the box？”
　　“and smiley says, sorter indifferent-like, it might be a parrot, or it might be a canary, maybe, but it ain’t—it’s only just a frog.’
www．Ｌｚｕｏｗｅｎ．ｃｏｍ下~书~网



第10章 卡拉维拉县有名的跳蛙 马克·吐温 (3)


　　“and the feller took it, and looked at it careful, and turned it round this way and that, and says, h’m—so ’tis. well, what’s he good for？’
　　“well,’ smiley says, easy and careless, he’s good enough for one thing, i should judge—he can outjump any frog in calaveras county.’
　　“the feller took the box again, and took another long, particular look, and give it back to smiley, and says, very deliberate, ’well,’ he says, i don’t see no p’ints about that frog that’s any better’n any other frog.’
　　“maybe you don’t,’ smiley says. maybe you understand frogs and maybe you don’t understand ’em; maybe you’ve had experience, and maybe you ain’t only a amature, as it were. anyways, i’ve got my opinion, and i’ll resk forty dollars that he can outjump any frog in calaveras county.’
　　“and the feller studied a minute, and then says, kinder sad like, well, i’m only a stranger here, and i ain’t got no frog; but if i had a frog, i’d bet you.’
　　“and then smiley says, that’s all right—that’s all right—if you’ll hold my box a minute, i’ll go and get you a frog.’ and so the feller took the box, and put up his forty dollars along with smiley’s, and set down to wait.
　　“so he set there a good while thinking and thinking to himself, and then he got the frog out and prized his mouth open and took a teaspoon and filled him full of quail- shot—filled him pretty near up to his chin—and set him on the floor. smiley he went to the swamp and slopped around in the mud for a long time, and finally he fetched a frog, and fetched him in, and give him to this feller, and says:
　　“now, if you’re ready, set him alongside of dan’l, with his forepaws just even with dan’l’s, and i’ll give the word.’ then he says, ’one—two—three—git！ and him and the feller touched up the frogs from behind, and the new frog hopped off lively, but dan’l give a heave, and hysted up his shoulders—so—like a frenchman, but it warn’t no use—he couldn’t budge; he was planted as solid as a church, and he couldn’t no more stir than if he was anchored out. smiley was a good deal surprised, and he was disgusted too, but he didn’t have no idea what the matter was, of course.
　　“the feller took the money and started away; and when he was going out at the door, he sorter jerked his thumb over his shoulder—so—at dan’l, and says again, very deliberate, well,’ he says, i don’t see no p’ints about that frog that’s any better’n any other frog.’
　　“smiley he stood scratching his head and looking down at dan’l a long time, and at last he says, ’i do wonder what in the nation that frog throw’d off for—i wonder if there ain’t something the matter with him—he’s pears to look mighty baggy, somehow.’ and he ketched dan’l by the nap of the neck, and hefted him, and says, ’why blame my cats if he don’t weigh five pound！’ and turned him upside down and he belched out a double handful of shot. and then he see how it was, and he was the maddest man—he set the frog down and took out after that feller, but he never ketched him. and—”
　　[here simon wheeler heard his name called from the front yard, and got up to see what was wanted.] and turning to me as he moved away, he said: “just set where you are, stranger, and rest easy—i ain’t going to be gone a second.”
　　but, by your leave, i did not think that a continuation of the history of the enterprising vagabond jim smiley would be likely to afford me much information concerning the rev. leonidas w. smiley, and so i started away.
　　at the door i met the sociable wheeler returning, and he buttonholed me and recommenced:
　　“well, thish-yer smiley had a yaller one-eyed cow that didn’t have no tail, only just a short stump like a bannanner, and—”
　　however, lacking both time and inclination, i did not wait to hear about the afflicted cow, but took my leave.
　　卡拉维拉县有名的跳蛙
　　[美国] 马克·吐温
　　马克·吐温（1835-1910），美国杰出的小说家，美国文学史上最重要的作家之一，也是美国文学史上第一个用口语写作的作家，开创了一代文风，被福克纳称为“美国文学之父”。马克·吐温幼年家境贫寒，被迫放弃学业外出谋生。丰富的生活经历对他后期的创作影响很大。19世纪70年代到90年代是他创作的鼎盛时期，其代表作有《哈克贝利费恩历险记》和他的姊妹篇《汤姆·索亚历险记》等。
　　东部的一个朋友写了封信来。受他之托，我拜访了脾气好但喜欢絮叨的老西蒙·威勒，想从他那打听我朋友的朋友列昂尼达斯·w.斯迈雷的下落，但直到现在，我也没打听个所以然来。于是，我就想，我朋友肯定不认识什么列昂尼达斯·w.斯迈雷先生，说不定此人是他瞎编的；他准是琢磨着——只要我向老威勒一打听，就会让他想起那个臭名昭著的吉姆·斯迈雷来，接着他就会把吉姆·斯迈雷的斑斑劣迹全抖出来，那些乏味又冗长且与我毫不相干的事准会让我烦死。如果朋友存心这么干，那他的确做到了。
  



第11章 卡拉维拉县有名的跳蛙 马克·吐温 (4)


　　在安吉尔矿山屯那破烂不堪的歪斜的酒馆里，我找到了西蒙·威勒，他正靠着酒吧间的炉子舒舒服服地打盹。他很胖、秃头，一脸的安详，透着亲切和质朴。他站起身来向我问好。我告诉他，朋友托我来打听他儿时的一位挚友——列昂尼达斯·w.斯迈雷，也就是年轻的福音传教士列昂尼达斯·w.斯迈雷神父，听说他曾在安吉尔屯住过。我还说，如果威勒先生能告诉我有关神父的消息，我将不胜感激。
　　西蒙·威勒把我逼到墙角，用椅子挡住我的去路。然后，他坐在椅子上，讲了一通枯燥无味的事情，这在以下的段落将会提到。他脸上毫无笑意，眉头紧蹙，从说第一句话开始，他的语调就没变过，对任何事总也有点猜疑；他那无休止的言语中透着一种热心和诚挚，在我看来，这种热心和诚挚确是表露无疑了。按他的想法，讲出这件事很紧要，并且也相当有趣，他还对故事里的两位主人公推崇备至，认为他们智谋超群。于是，我一直没打断他，让他按自己的思路讲下去。
　　“列昂尼达斯神父，嗯，列神父——嗯，这里以前倒是有一个叫吉姆·斯迈雷的，那是四九年冬天——也许是五零年春天——不知怎的，我也记得不太清楚了。反正不是四九年就是五零年，因为他刚来屯子时，大水槽还没有建好呢！别的不说，就说他本人，他可算得上是天下最古怪的人了。只要有人愿意和他打赌，碰到什么就赌什么，别人不赌的，他赌。无论别人怎么个赌法，他都奉陪到底——不论何种方式，只要能赌得起来，他就很满足了。尽管这样，他还是很有运气，并且不是一般的好运，要知道，十场他能赢九场。他随时都准备赌，并也一直寻找这样的机会；只要有人提出要赌，不论大赌小赌、下注哪边，他都照赌不误。这些我已经跟你讲过了。
　　要是赛马的话，他不是赢个大满贯，就会输个精光；斗狗，他赌；斗猫，他赌；斗鸡，他也赌；就是落在篱笆上的两只鸟，他也会跟你赌哪只会先飞走；如果屯子里有聚会，他一定会准时到场，到了就拿沃尔克牧师打赌，他打赌说，沃尔克牧师是这一带的最棒的训诫者。这还用说吗？沃尔克牧师本来就很不错；如果看见一只屎壳螂朝哪儿爬，他甚至会跟你赌它要多久才到那里——只要你和他赌，不论它爬向哪里，哪怕是去墨西哥，他也会跟着这只屎壳螂，看看它要去哪里，要花多长时间。住这儿的小伙子们差不多都见过斯迈雷，都能给你讲讲他这个人。为什么呢？他的事都一个样——什么都赌——那家伙特有意思。有一次，沃尔克牧师的太太病得严重，都好几天了，眼看就没救了。一天早上，牧师进来了，斯迈雷站起身来问他太太的病情，他说好多了——多亏主大发慈悲——有了主的保佑，她很快就会好的。他还没讲完，斯迈雷说：这样吧，我押两块五，赌她病好不了。’
　　“斯迈雷养了一匹母马——小伙子们都叫它一刻钟老太太’。这仅是玩笑话，它当然不会跑这么慢——他还经常靠这匹马赢钱呢。因为它跑得很慢，不是得哮喘，就是生瘟热、有肺病之类的。于是，他们总让它先跑两三百码，但在半路就会追上它，可快接近终点时，它就精神起来了，不顾一切地向前冲，马不停蹄地飞跑，乱甩着的蹄子。有时踢空，有时踢到篱笆上，搅得尘土飞扬，再加上咳嗽、打喷嚏、擤鼻涕，就显得闹闹哄哄的了——它冲到裁判席前时，总比别的马多出一个头，正好能让人看个明白。
　　“他还养了只小公狗，单看外表，你肯定以为它一钱不值，只配拴在那儿，并且看起来还给人一种贼溜溜的感觉，好像总想偷点什么。然而，一旦它成为赌注，就不一样了——下巴向前伸着，就像汽船的前甲板；下槽牙露着，发出跟炉火一样的烈光。如果别的狗想攻击它、咬它或是想让它多尝几次苦头，那安德鲁·杰克逊呢——那条狗的名字——安德鲁·杰克逊总不会轻易表露它的喜好，好像它根本就不期盼什么似的——而人们押在另一条狗上赌注的倍数也一翻再翻，直到没钱再押了为止；这时，安德鲁·杰克逊就一口咬住那条狗的后腿，不肯松口——你知道吗？它并不是撕咬，只是咬住不放松，哪怕是咬上一年，也要等到那只狗认输。
　　斯迈雷总能靠这只狗大赢一把，但他却栽在了一条没有后腿的狗身上，因为那条狗的后腿让锯片给锯掉了。那次，两条狗斗了好久，押赌双方的钱也用完了。安德鲁·杰克逊还是习惯性地去咬对方的后腿，不一会儿，它就发现自己上当了，那条狗涮了它一把。这么说吧，当时，它好像大吃一惊后就丧气起来，也不尽力去打赢这场比赛了；它让人骗惨了。它看了斯迈雷一眼，好像在说——这都是斯迈雷的错，怎么弄了这么一个没后腿的狗来让它咬呢，要知道，它获胜全靠咬后腿了，这把它的心都伤透了。接着，它一瘸一拐地离开，最后倒在路边死了。安德鲁·杰克逊的确是条好狗，要是它还活着，准能出名，要知道，它胚子好，又聪明——这些我都看在眼里，只是它不能说话而已。如果他没真本事，就不可能赢那么多次了。唉，一想起它最后斗的那一次和它的下场，我就为它难过。
　　“唉，斯迈雷还养过拿耗子的狗、小公鸡、雄猫等这类小动物呢。不论你跟他赌什么，他都能跟你兵对兵，将对将，让你赌个没完。有一天，他逮到了一只青蛙，把它带回家里，说是要好好训练一番；整整三个月，他什么事也不干，就只在后院里教那只青蛙跳。你猜的没错，他把那只青蛙训练出来了。他只要在青蛙后面戳一下，那青蛙就会像油炸圈饼一样在空中打个转——要是起跳恰到好处，说不定它还会翻一两个筋斗呢，然后像猫一样，稳稳当当地落到地上。他还一遍又一遍地训练它逮苍蝇，练到最后，不论苍蝇飞出有多远，只要它看见了，都逃不出它的掌心。斯迈雷说青蛙爱学习，并且学什么会什么——这话我信。
　　为什么呢？我就亲见他把丹尼尔·韦伯斯特放在这地板上——那青蛙名叫丹尼尔·韦伯斯特——然后，大喊道：苍蝇，丹尼尔，苍蝇！’不到一秒工夫，那青蛙就直跳起来把那边柜台上的一只苍蝇给吞了下去，接着，它就如烂泥般噗地一声落到地上，还旁若无人似的用后腿挠着头，好像觉得自己并不比其他青蛙出色。别看他有能耐，你还真找不出这么朴实率直的青蛙了。只要是竖直往上跳，它能跳得比别的青蛙高出一个身子。要知道，从平地往上跳是它的强项。只要是拿这只青蛙打赌，斯迈雷就会把注一并压上去。对他的青蛙，他可是万分自豪呢。不过话又说回来，就是那些见多识广的老江湖也都说从没见过这么棒的青蛙。
　　“斯迈雷用一个小笼子装着那只青蛙，还经常带着它逛街，设赌局。一天，一个汉子—— 一个外乡人——来到屯子，正碰上提着青蛙笼子的斯迈雷。外乡人问道：你的笼子里装着什么呀？’
　　“斯迈雷板着脸说：你以为它是只鹦鹉，或是只鸟雀吧，可它偏不是——这是只青蛙。’
　　“外乡人拿过笼子，翻来倒去地仔细瞅了又瞅，说道：哦——果然是只青蛙呢。它能做什么呀？’
　　“斯迈雷不紧不慢地说：噢，它有一件看家本领，就是——它跳得比这卡县所有的蛙都高。’
　　“那汉子拿过笼子，又仔仔细细地瞅了半天后才还给他，然后非常小心地说道：是吗？我看它和别的青蛙也没什么两样嘛。’
　　“你也许瞧不出来，’斯迈雷说，可能你对青蛙很了解，也可能你就是门外汉；可能你养过青蛙，也可能没有。不管怎么样，我想说的就是，我赌四十块钱，赌它比卡县任何一只青蛙都跳得高。’
　　“外乡人琢磨了一会，有点为难的样子：噢，我人生地不熟的，又没带青蛙。如果我有一只的话，我一定跟你赌。’
　　“于是，斯迈雷就说：这个容易——这个容易——你替我拿一下笼子，我这就去给你逮一只来。’这样，那汉子拎着笼子，把他的和斯迈雷的四十块钱放在一起，就坐下来等他。
　　“那汉子坐着想来想去，然后，从笼子里把青蛙抓了出来，扒开它的嘴，用勺子给它灌了一肚子火枪的铁砂子——几乎灌到了它的下巴——然后，他把它放到了地上。而斯迈雷呢，他径直去了沼泽地，在烂泥中抓了一通，总算逮了只青蛙。他把青蛙抓了回来，交给那个汉子：
　　现在，你有青蛙了，把它和丹尼尔并排放着吧，前爪放齐，我喊口号。’接着斯迈雷喊道：一——二——三——蹦！’他和汉子都从后面点了那两只青蛙，那只新来的青蛙蹦得特有劲，而丹尼尔却喘了口粗气，只耸了耸肩膀——这个样子——像极了法国人。但耸肩一点作用也不起啊——它像生了根似的，动也不动；又如抛锚了一般，寸步难移。斯迈雷甚是惊讶，又呕火；他当然想不通这到底是怎么回事。
　　“那个外乡人拿了钱就走；出门时，还转过身来用大拇指——就像这样——指着丹尼尔，一字一顿地说道：呃，我看它和别的青蛙没什么两样嘛。’
　　“斯迈雷站在那里抓耳挠腮，还低头看了丹尼尔好一阵子，最后，他说：这只青蛙怎么就栽了呢——难不成它犯了什么毛病——看起来，它肚子胀得不轻呢。’他揪着青蛙脖子上的皮，把它掂了起来：它没五磅重才怪呢！’然后，他把蛙头朝下，没想到，丹尼尔居然打嗝吐出满满两大把铁砂来。斯迈雷这才明白过来，他气疯了——放下青蛙就去追那个汉子，但哪里追得到呢。”
　　（这时，西蒙·威勒听到前院有人喊他，就站起来去看有什么事。）他一边往外走，一边回过头来对我说：“朋友，就坐在这里，歇一下——我马上就来。”
　　对不住您了，再听下去，就是牛皮糖吉姆·斯迈雷的故事了，再怎么样，也打听不出列昂尼达斯·w.斯迈雷神父的下落啊。于是，我马上起身离开。
　　在门口，我碰上了正往回走的威勒，他扣住我，又滔滔不绝起来：
　　“还有，这个斯迈雷有一头没有尾巴的独眼母牛，看起来就像一根香蕉，还有呢——”
　　然而，我是既没时间，也没这个嗜好听他讲这些。所以，在他开口讲那头苦难的母牛之前，我就走了。
/



第12章 寂静的雪野杰克·伦敦 (1)


　　the white silence
　　jack london
　　carmen won’t last more than a couple of days.’ mason spat out a chunk of ice and surveyed the poor animal ruefully, then put her foot in his mouth and proceeded to bite out the ice which clustered cruelly between the toes.
　　i never saw a dog with a highfalutin’ name that ever was worth a rap,’ he said, as he concluded his task and shoved her aside. ’they just fade away and die under the responsibility. did ye ever see one go wrong with a sensible name like cassiar, siwash, or husky？ no, sir！ take a look at shookum here, he’s-’ snap！ the lean brute flashed up, the white teeth just missing mason’s throat.
　　ye will, will ye？’ a shrewd clout behind the ear with the butt of the dog whip stretched the animal in the snow, quivering softly, a yellow slaver dripping from its fangs.
　　as i was saying, just look at shookum here-he’s got the spirit. bet ye he eats carmen before the week’s out.’ i’ll bank another proposition against that,’ replied malemute kid, reversing the frozen bread placed before the fire to thaw. ’we’ll eat shookum before the trip is over. what d’ye say, ruth？’ the indian woman settled the coffee with a piece of ice, glanced from malemute kid to her husband, then at the dogs, but vouchsafed no reply. it was such a palpable truism that none was necessary. two hundred miles of unbroken trail in prospect, with a scant six days’ grub for themselves and none for the dogs, could admit no other alternative. the two men and the woman grouped about the fire and began their meager meal. the dogs lay in their harnesses for it was a midday halt, and watched each mouthful enviously.
　　no more lunches after today,’ said malemute kid. ’and we’ve got to keep a close eye on the dogs-they’re getting vicious. they’d just as soon pull a fellow down as not, if they get a chance.’ and i was president of an epworth once, and taught in the sunday school.’ having irrelevantly delivered himself of this, mason fell into a dreamy contemplation of his steaming moccasins, but was aroused by ruth filling his cup.
　　thank god, we’ve got slathers of tea！ i’ve seen it growing, down in tennessee. what wouldn’t i give for a hot corn pone just now！ never mind, ruth; you won’t starve much longer, nor wear moccasins either.’ the woman threw off her gloom at this, and in her eyes welled up a great love for her white lord-the first white man she had ever seen-the first man whom she had known to treat a woman as something better than a mere animal or beast of burden.
　　yes, ruth,’ continued her husband, having recourse to the macaronic jargon in which it was alone possible for them to understand each other; ’wait till we clean up and pull for the outside. we’ll take the white man’s canoe and go to the salt water. yes, bad water, rough water-great mountains dance up and down all the time. and so big, so far, so far away-you travel ten sleep, twenty sleep, forty sleep’-he graphically enumerated the days on his fingers-’all the time water, bad water. then you come to great village, plenty people, just the same mosquitoes next summer. wigwams oh, so high-ten, twenty pines.
　　hi-yu skookum！’ he paused impotently, cast an appealing glance at malemute kid, then laboriously placed the twenty pines, end on end, by sign language. malemute kid smiled with cheery cynicism; but ruth’s eyes were wide with wonder, and with pleasure; for she half believed he was joking, and such condescension pleased her poor woman’s heart.
　　and then you step into a-a box, and pouf！ up you go.’ he tossed his empty cup in the air by way of illustration and, as he deftly caught it, cried: ’and biff！ down you come. oh, great medicine men！ you go fort yukon. i go arctic city-twenty-five sleep-big string, all the time-i catch him string-i say, “hello, ruth！ how are ye？”-and you say, “is that my good husband？”-and i say, “yes”-and you say, “no can bake good bread, no more soda”-then i say, “look in cache, under flour; good-by.” you look and catch plenty soda. all the time you fort yukon, me arctic city. hi-yu medicine man！’ ruth smiled so ingenuously at the fairy story that both men burst into laughter. a row among the dogs cut short the wonders of the outside, and by the time the snarling combatants were separated, she had lashed the sleds and all was ready for the trail.- ’mush！ baldy！ hi！ mush on！’ mason worked his whip smartly and, as the dogs whined low in the traces, broke out the sled with the gee pole. ruth followed with the second team, leaving malemute kid, who had helped her start, to bring up the rear. strong man, brute that he was, capable of felling an ox at a blow, he could not bear to beat the poor animals, but humored them as a dog driver rarely does-nay, almost wept with them in their misery.
　　come, mush on there, you poor sore-footed brutes！’ he murmured, after several ineffectual attempts to start the load. but his patience was at last rewarded, and though whimpering with pain, they hastened to join their fellows.
　　no more conversation; the toil of the trail will not permit such extravagance.




第13章 寂静的雪野杰克·伦敦 (2)


　　and of all deadening labors, that of the northland trail is the worst. happy is the man who can weather a day’s travel at the price of silence, and that on a beaten track. and of all heartbreaking labors, that of breaking trail is the worst. at every step the great webbed shoe sinks till the snow is level with the knee. then up, straight up, the deviation of a fraction of an inch being a certain precursor of disaster, the snowshoe must be lifted till the surface is cleared; then forward, down, and the other foot is raised perpendicularly for the matter of half a yard. he who tries this for the first time, if haply he avoids bringing his shoes in dangerous propinquity and measures not his length on the treacherous footing, will give up exhausted at the end of a hundred yards; he who can keep out of the way of the dogs for a whole day may well crawl into his sleeping bag with a clear conscience and a pride which passeth all understanding; and he who travels twenty sleeps on the long trail is a man whom the gods may envy.
　　the afternoon wore on, and with the awe, born of the white silence, the voiceless travelers bent to their work. nature has many tricks wherewith she convinces man of his finity-the ceaseless flow of the tides, the fury of the storm, the shock of the earthquake, the long roll of heaven’s artillery-but the most tremendous, the most stupefying of all, is the passive phase of the white silence. all movement ceases, the sky clears, the heavens are as brass; the slightest whisper seems sacrilege, and man becomes timid, affrighted at the sound of his own voice. sole speck of life journeying across the ghostly wastes of a dead world, he trembles at his audacity, realizes that his is a maggot’s life, nothing more.
　　strange thoughts arise unsummoned, and the mystery of all things strives for utterance.
　　and the fear of death, of god, of the universe, comes over him-the hope of the resurrection and the life, the yearning for immortality, the vain striving of the imprisoned essence-it is then, if ever, man walks alone with god.
　　so wore the day away. the river took a great bend, and mason headed his team for the cutoff across the narrow neck of land. but the dogs balked at the high bank. again and again, though ruth and malemute kid were shoving on the sled, they slipped back. then came the concerted effort. the miserable creatures, weak from hunger, exerted their last strength. up-up-the sled poised on the top of the bank; but the leader swung the string of dogs behind him to the right, fouling mason’s snowshoes. the result was grievous.
　　mason was whipped off his feet; one of the dogs fell in the traces; and the sled toppled back, dragging everything to the bottom again.
　　slash！ the whip fell among the dogs savagely, especially upon the one which had fallen.
　　don’t,-mason,’ entreated malemute kid; ’the poor devil’s on its last legs. wait and we’ll put my team on.’ mason deliberately withheld the whip till the last word had fallen, then out flashed the long lash, completely curling about the offending creature’s body.
　　carmen-for it was carmen-cowered in the snow, cried piteously, then rolled over on her side.
　　it was a tragic moment, a pitiful incident of the trail-a dying dog, two comrades in anger.
　　ruth glanced solicitously from man to man. but malemute kid restrained himself, though there was a world of reproach in his eyes, and, bending over the dog, cut the traces. no word was spoken. the teams were doublespanned and the difficulty overcome; the sleds were under way again, the dying dog dragging herself along in the rear. as long as an animal can travel, it is not shot, and this last chance is accorded it-the crawling into camp, if it can, in the hope of a moose being killed.
　　already penitent for his angry action, but too stubborn to make amends, mason toiled on at the head of the cavalcade, little dreaming that danger hovered in the air. the timber clustered thick in the sheltered bottom, and through this they threaded their way. fifty feet or more from the trail towered a lofty pine. for generations it had stood there, and for generations destiny had had this one end in view-perhaps the same had been decreed of mason.
　　he stooped to fasten the loosened thong of his moccasin. the sleds came to a halt, and the dogs lay down in the snow without a whimper. the stillness was weird; not a breath rustled the frost-encrusted forest; the cold and silence of outer space had chilled the heart and smote the trembling lips of nature. a sigh pulsed through the air-they did not seem to actually hear it, but rather felt it, like the premonition of movement in a motionless void. then the great tree, burdened with its weight of years and snow, played its last part in the tragedy of life. he heard the warning crash and attempted to spring up but, almost erect, caught the blow squarely on the shoulder.
　　the sudden danger, the quick death-how often had malemute kid faced it！ the pine needles were still quivering as he gave his commands and sprang into action. nor did the indian girl faint or raise her voice in idle wailing, as might many of her white sisters. at his order, she threw her weight on the end of a quickly extemporized handspike, easing the pressure and listening to her husband’s groans, while malemute kid attacked the tree with his ax. the steel rang merrily as it bit into the frozen trunk, each stroke being accompanied by a forced, audible respiration, the huh！’ huh！’ of the woodsman.
下…… 书 ……网



第14章 寂静的雪野杰克·伦敦 (3)


　　at last the kid laid the pitiable thing that was once a man in the snow. but worse than his comrade’s pain was the dumb anguish in the woman’s face, the blended look of hopeful, hopeless query. little was said; those of the northland are early taught the futility of words and the inestimable value of deeds. with the temperature at sixty-five below zero, a man cannot lie many minutes in the snow and live. so the sled lashings were cut, and the sufferer, rolled in furs, laid on a couch of boughs. before him roared a fire, built of the very wood which wrought the mishap. behind and partially over him was stretched the primitive fly-a piece of canvas, which caught the radiating heat and threw it back and down upon hima trick which men may know who study physics at the fount.
　　and men who have shared their bed with death know when the call is sounded. mason was terribly crushed. the most cursory examination revealed it.
　　his right arm, leg, and back were broken; his limbs were paralyzed from the hips; and the likelihood of internal injuries was large. an occasional moan was his only sign of life.
　　no hope; nothing to be done. the pitiless night crept slowly by-ruth’s portion, the despairing stoicism of her race, and malemute kid adding new lines to his face of bronze.
　　in fact, mason suffered least of all, for he spent his time in eastern tennessee, in the great smoky mountains, living over the scenes of his childhood. and most pathetic was the melody of his long-forgotten southern vernacular, as he raved of swimming holes and coon hunts and watermelon raids. it was as greek to ruth, but the kid understood and felt-felt as only one can feel who has been shut out for years from all that civilization means.
　　morning brought consciousness to the stricken man, and malemute kid bent closer to catch his whispers.
　　you remember when we foregathered on the tanana, four years come next ice run？ i didn’t care so much for her then. it was more like she was pretty, and there was a smack of excitement about it, i think. but i’ve know, i’ve come to think a heap of her. she’s been a good wife to me, always at my shoulder in the pinch. and when it comes to trading, you know there isn’t her equal. d’ye recollect the time she shot the moosehorn rapids to pull you and me off that rock, the bullets whipping the water like hailstones？— and the time of the famine at nuklukyeto？-when she raced the ice run to bring the news？
　　yes, she’s been a good wife to me, better’n that other one. didn’t know i’d been there？
　　never told you, eh？ well, i tried it once, down in the states. that’s why i’m here. been raised together, too. i came away to give her a chance for divorce. she got it.
　　but that’s got nothing to do with ruth. i had thought of cleaning up and pulling for the outside next year-her and i-but it’s too late. don’t send her back to her people, kid. it’s beastly hard for a woman to go back. think of it！-nearly four years on our bacon and beans and flour and dried fruit, and then to go back to her fish and caribou. it’s not good for her to have tried our ways, to come to know they’re better’n her people’s, and then return to them. take care of her, kidwhy don’t you-but no, you always fought shy of them-and you never told me why you came to this country. be kind to her, and send her back to the states as soon as you can. but fix it so she can come back-liable to get homesick, you know.
　　and the youngster-it’s drawn us closer, kid. i only hope it is a boy. think of it！-flesh of my flesh, kid. he mustn’t stop in this country. and if it’s a girl, why, she can’t. sell my furs; they’ll fetch at least five thousand, and i’ve got as much more with the company. and handle my interests with yours. i think that bench claim will show up. see that he gets a good schooling; and kid, above all, don’t let him come back. this country was not made for white men.
　　i’m a gone man, kid. three or four sleeps at the best. you’ve got to go on. you must go on！ remember, it’s my wife, it’s my boy-o god！ i hope it’s a boy！ you can’t stay by me-and i charge you, a dying man, to pull on.’
　　give me three days,’ pleaded malemute kid. ’you may change for the better; something may turn up.’
　　no.’
　　just three days.’
　　you must pull on.’
　　two days.’
　　it’s my wife and my boy, kid. you would not ask it.’
　　one day.’
　　no, no！ i charge-’
　　only one day. we can shave it through on the grub, and i might knock over a moose.’
　　no-all right; one day, but not a minute more. and, kid, don’t-don’t leave me to face it alone. just a shot, one pull on the trigger. you understand. think of it！ think of it！ flesh of my flesh, and i’ll never live to see him！
　　send ruth here. i want to say good-by and tell her that she must think of the boy and not wait till i’m dead. she might refuse to go with you if i didn’t. goodby, old man; good-by.
　　kid！ i say-a-sink a hole above the pup, next to the slide. i panned out forty cents on my shovel there.
　　and, kid！’ he stooped lower to catch the last faint words, the dying man’s surrender of his pride. ’i’m sorry-for-you know-carmen.’ leaving the girl crying softly over her man, malemute kid slipped into his parka and snowshoes, tucked his rifle under his arm, and crept away into the forest. he was no tyro in the stern sorrows of the northland, but never had he faced so stiff a problem as this. in the abstract, it was a plain, mathematical propositionthree possible lives as against one doomed one. but now he hesitated. for five years, shoulder to shoulder, on the rivers and trails, in the camps and mines, facing death by field and flood and famine, had they knitted the bonds of their comradeship. so close was the tie that he had often been conscious of a vague jealousy of ruth, from the first time she had come between. and now it must be severed by his own hand.
wwＷ、xiabook.com



第15章 寂静的雪野杰克·伦敦 (4)


　　though he prayed for a moose, just one moose, all game seemed to have deserted the land, and nightfall found the exhausted man crawling into camp, lighthanded, heavyhearted. an uproar from the dogs and shrill cries from ruth hastened him.
　　bursting into the camp, he saw the girl in the midst of the snarling pack, laying about her with an ax. the dogs had broken the iron rule of their masters and were rushing the grub.
　　he joined the issue with his rifle reversed, and the hoary game of natural selection was played out with all the ruthlessness of its primeval environment. rifle and ax went up and down, hit or missed with monotonous regularity; lithe bodies flashed, with wild eyes and dripping fangs; and man and beast fought for supremacy to the bitterest conclusion. then the beaten brutes crept to the edge of the firelight, licking their wounds, voicing their misery to the stars.
　　the whole stock of dried salmon had been devoured, and perhaps five pounds of flour remained to tide them over two hundred miles of wilderness. ruth returned to her husband, while malemute kid cut up the warm body of one of the dogs, the skull of which had been crushed by the ax. every portion was carefully put away, save the hide and offal, which were cast to his fellows of the moment before.
　　morning brought fresh trouble. the animals were turning on each other. carmen, who still clung to her slender thread of life, was downed by the pack. the lash fell among them unheeded. they cringed and cried under the blows, but refused to scatter till the last wretched bit had disappeared-bones, hide, hair, everything.
　　malemute kid went about his work, listening to mason, who was back in tennessee, delivering tangled discourses and wild exhortations to his brethren of other days.
　　taking advantage of neighboring pines, he worked rapidly, and ruth watched him make a cache similar to those sometimes used by hunters to preserve their meat from the wolverines and dogs. one after the other, he bent the tops of two small pines toward each other and nearly to the ground, making them fast with thongs of moosehide. then he beat the dogs into submission and harnessed them to two of the sleds, loading the same with everything but the furs which enveloped mason. these he wrapped and lashed tightly about him, fastening either end of the robes to the bent pines. a single stroke of his hunting knife would release them and send the body high in the air.
　　ruth had received her husband’s last wishes and made no struggle. poor girl, she had learned the lesson of obedience well. from a child, she had bowed, and seen all women bow, to the lords of creation, and it did not seem in the nature of things for woman to resist. the kid permitted her one outburst of grief, as she kissed her husband-her own people had no such custom-then led her to the foremost sled and helped her into her snowshoes. blindly, instinctively, she took the gee pole and whip, and ’mushed’ the dogs out on the trail. then he returned to mason, who had fallen into a coma, and long after she was out of sight crouched by the fire, waiting, hoping, praying for his comrade to die.
　　it is not pleasant to be alone with painful thoughts in the white silence. the silence of gloom is merciful, shrouding one as with protection and breathing a thousand intangible sympathies; but the bright white silence, clear and cold, under steely skies, is pitiless.
　　an hour passed-two hours-but the man would not die. at high noon the sun, without raising its rim above the southern horizon, threw a suggestion of fire athwart the heavens, then quickly drew it back. malemute kid roused and dragged himself to his comrade’s side. he cast one glance about him. the white silence seemed to sneer, and a great fear came upon him. there was a sharp report; mason swung into his aerial sepulcher, and malemute kid lashed the dogs into a wild gallop as he fled across the snow.
　　寂静的雪野
　　[美国]杰克·伦敦
　　杰克·伦敦（1876-1916），美国最著名的作家之一，批判现实主义者。他出身贫困，童年就以从事繁重劳动谋生，先后做过工人、水手、司炉、淘金者，甚至流浪汉。艰苦的生活使他深切体会到损贫利富的社会的弊垢，他对社会问题深感兴趣，自称是社会学者，从事过工人运动。他的短篇小说独树一帜，情节紧凑，人物栩栩如生，深受读者喜爱。代表作有《狼的儿子》《荒野的呼唤》《铁蹄》等。
　　“卡门撑不了几天啦！”梅森吐出一块冰，悲伤地打量着这只可怜的狗，紧接着把它的脚放到自己的嘴里，继续咬它脚趾间冻得死死的冰。
　　“我从来没有见过一只狗起了这么一个傲慢的名字，居然还能成为功臣。”他处理完卡门的脚之后便把它推到一边说：“它们就是这样背负着责任逐渐地死去。那些有着聪明名字的狗，比如卡西亚、西瓦什或是哈斯基，你见过它们出问题吗？没有吧！看看咱们的舒库姆，它是……”正说着，这只精瘦的狗突然野性大发，白晃晃的牙齿差点咬住了梅森的喉咙。
　　“你准备咬我吗？啊？”他迅速用狗鞭子的柄在狗的耳朵后面打了一下，舒库姆倒在了雪地里，轻轻地哆嗦着，黄色的口水顺着它的尖牙滴了下来。
　　“就像我刚才说的，看看咱们的舒库姆——它就是这么精神，我敢跟你打赌，不出一个星期，它就会把卡门吃了。”“我打赌肯定会是另一种情况。”马尔穆特·基德边说边翻了一下放在火边解冻的面包。“旅行结束前，我们会把舒库姆吃了。露丝，你说呢？”这个印第安女人往咖啡里加了一块冰，目光从马尔穆特·基德转向她的丈夫，然后停留在那些狗的身上，却没有给出任何回答。这是显而易见的，说什么并不重要。带着不足六天的食物穿越两百英里的无人区，别说狗了，人的食物都不够。所以，不得不承认，这是别无选择的。两个男人和一个女人围坐在火边开始享用这少得可怜的食物。这是一天中的休息时间，狗带着皮套趴在那里，嫉妒地看着有东西吃的人们。
　　“从明天开始就不再有午餐了。”马尔穆特·基德说。“我们得注意点这些狗，它们开始变得有恶意了。刚刚就差点扑倒一个人，要是有机会的话，它们还会这样做的。”“我曾经担任过美以美教会的主席，还在主日学校教过课。”不合时宜地说了句这个之后，梅森开始盯着他那块冒着热气的鹿皮靴愣神，直到露丝给她续加咖啡的时候才缓过神来。
　　“感谢上帝，我们还有这么多茶！我曾经见过茶的生长，在田纳西州。现在谁要是能给我一个热玉米饼，我愿意给他任何东西！别担心了，露丝，你不会再忍受太久的饥饿了，也不用再穿鹿皮靴了。”听到这个，露丝不再沮丧，眼睛里流露出对丈夫的爱意。她的丈夫是她见到的第一个白人，第一个对待女人不像对待动物或是那些只会干活的畜生的人。
　　“是的，露丝。”她的丈夫继续说着一些只有他们之间才明白的话。“等我们料理完这些事，就出去。咱们坐着白人的独木舟去大海。是的，大海是如此汹涌，像山一样的海浪不停地跳上跳下；大海又是如此遥远，远得你睡十觉、二十觉，甚至四十觉醒来之后还是看不到边。”他一边掰着手指头数日子一边说着。“周围一直是大海，坏坏的大海。然后，你会到一个大村庄，人多得像明年夏天的蚊子。棚屋，哇塞，那是一个高，简直有十棵二十棵松树叠起来那么高。”
　　“嗨，舒库姆呀！”他无力地暂停了，以恳求的眼光看着马尔穆特·基德，然后比划着努力要把20棵松树按顺序排好。马尔穆特·基德带着愉快地讥讽微笑着，露丝的眼中却充满了快乐的惊奇感，因为她半信半疑，觉得梅森在说笑话，但他的这种殷勤愉悦了这个可怜女人的心。




第16章 寂静的雪野杰克·伦敦 (5)


　　“然后，你走进一个大箱子里，砰！你上去了。”他说着把手中的空杯子抛向空中做示范，然后灵巧地接住并喊着：“啪！你又下来啦。哦，伟大的法师啊！你去空育城堡，我去相隔二十五天路程的北极城。两个地方用一条绳子连着，我拿起一头说你好，露丝！过的还好吗？’你说你是我优秀的丈夫吗？’我回答是呀！’你又说没有苏打了，没法烤好吃的面包了。’我说在储藏室的面粉下边找一找，再见。’然后，你就找到了很多苏打。你一直都在空育城堡，而我在北极城。伟大的法师呀。”听了这个神话故事，露丝率真地笑了，两个男人也笑了起来。忽然，那群狗打起架来，打断了他们对外面的猜想。当这些格斗者被分开的时候，露丝已经绑好了雪橇，准备出发了。“快跑，秃子，加油！”梅森潇洒地挥舞着手中的鞭子，当套好的狗发出低嚎声的时候，把雪橇舵杆向后一拉就可以出发了。露丝赶着第二队狗出发了，留下了帮助她出发的马尔穆特·基德来接应后方。基德是一个强壮的男人，特别粗暴，能把一头牛打倒在地，但他不忍心伤害这群可怜的狗，而是哄着它们。很少有赶狗的人会这样做。不仅如此，他还会因为它们遭罪而哭泣。
　　“来，出发吧，你们这群可怜的、脚很疼的畜生！”在几次试图出发失败后，他咕哝着。但他的耐心总算没有白费，在狗发出了一阵痛苦的悲嚎之后，开始加速追赶他们的伙伴。
　　下午即将过去，带着对这片茫茫雪原的敬畏，赶路者们默默地专注于行进。大自然的变幻莫测让人们望而生畏——无休止的潮汐，肆虐的暴风雨，颤动的地震，隆隆轰鸣的雷声——而最让人茫然的，还要算是这只身处于林海雪原之中。一切了然无声，万里无云的天空泛着古铜色；任何细小的声响都能打破这种寂静，人们甚至都会被自己的声音吓到。人们不禁意识到自己如小虫般微不足道，为自己贸然闯入这如死亡般寂静的世界而颤抖。
　　古怪的念头在心里翻滚，神秘的事情也不断映入眼帘。
　　他突然感到对死亡、上帝、世间万物的敬畏；对生命和重生的奢望；对不朽生命的渴求以及一直以来对被禁锢自由反抗的徒劳。此时此刻，如果有的话，他似乎能感到上帝是与他同行的。
　　就在这一天即将结束的时候，前方河流的方向发生了变化。为了走近路,梅森带领他的队伍通过一处比较狭窄的陆地。走到高堤处时，雪橇犬们突然停下了，不管露丝和马尔穆特·基德怎么努力驱赶它们，都起不到丝毫作用。这些可怜的动物，强烈的饥饿感已夺走了它们最后一丝力气。向上，再向上，雪橇停在高堤上纹丝不动。梅森将牵引雪橇犬的绳索绕到自己的右边，却不小心缠上了自己的靴子，真是让人无奈。
　　梅森试图解开缠在脚上的绳索。突然，一只雪橇犬陷进了雪里，结果所有的绳子都被拉了回去，所有东西又滑回到了高堤的脚下。
　　“快走！”鞭子如雨点般残忍地打在雪橇犬的身上，尤其是陷进雪里的那只。
　　“梅森,不要！” 马尔穆特·基德哀求道，“它恐怕是不行了。给我点时间，我会让它跟上的。”马尔穆特的话音刚落，梅森便停住了手中的鞭子，垂下长长的睫毛，盯着眼前这只可怜的雪橇犬。
　　“它是卡门啊!” 梅森痛苦地哭了，蜷缩在雪地上。
　　这是个悲剧般的时刻，对于这只孤独的队伍来说，无异于晴天霹雳——一只奄奄一息的雪橇犬和处于巨大悲愤中的人们。
　　露西关切地看着他们。尽管马尔穆特·基德的眼睛里充满了自责，但她强迫自己要忍住。她默默地做着善后工作——将狗身上的绳索割断，把它轻轻地放在地上。大家没有说一句话。这只队伍正在经历着身体和精神上的双重考验。雪橇被整理好，他们准备重新上路了。那只奄奄一息的雪橇犬跟在队伍的后面。在他们的眼里，只要这只动物还能行动，人们就不会抛弃甚至杀死它。人们会给它生的希望——如果坚持回到营地，希望能有一只麋鹿作为食物。
　　虽然梅森在心里为自己的行为做了忏悔，但是嘴上并没有说什么，只是默默地走在队伍的最前面，希望前方的危险能少一些。树林逐渐变得茂密起来。这使得他们能够轻松赶路。路两旁，五十英尺，甚至更高的松树亘古不变地矗立着。冥冥之中，命运似乎已经注定好了一切。
　　他停下来，把鞋带系紧了一些。队伍也顺势停了下来，雪橇犬们悄悄地卧在地上。一切都变得出奇的安静，树林里没有一点动静，倒是林子外面沙沙作响的风让人们感到透彻心扉的寒冷和无奈。一阵风突然刮过树林间——人们几乎没有听到它的声音，却真实地感受到了。就像有预感一样，伴随着自己在这个世界上扮演的最后一个华丽的角色，这些参天大树将负载了很多年的雪和自己的重量倾泻而下。虽然梅森听到了树干的声响，却还是没来得及躲开，一瞬间，他被掉落下来的积雪压了个正着。
　　这突如其来的危险出现在了马尔穆特·基德的面前！积雪掉下的那一刹那，梅森还在命令自己赶快跳开。此情此景不仅令印第安女孩失声痛哭起来，雪橇犬们也不禁黯然。按照基德的命令，露丝扔掉雪橇上的东西以减轻负重，希望能减轻梅森身上的压力，来腾出空间让他喘口气，而马尔穆特·基德则用斧头用力劈砍树枝，他渐渐急促的喘息声伴着风铃撞击冻树枝的声响，回荡在这片雪野上。
　　马尔穆特最终将奄奄一息的梅森挖了出来。马尔穆特的脸上泛着绝望：他打小就被告知，没有一个人能在零下65摄氏度的环境里活下去，而眼前的惨状已无须多言。马尔穆特割断了雪橇的绳索，将梅森用皮草裹起来，放在树枝上，同时用树枝简单地覆盖在他的身上以防止其他意外。最后，他将帆布盖在最上面，以最大限度的保暖。
　　梅森奄奄一息地躺在那里，从他的同伴匆匆结束的检查便可知道，他大势已去。
　　他的右臂、右腿，还有后背被砸成重伤，他的两条腿也被砸断，内伤更严重。呻吟不时地从他的喉咙中发出。
　　绝望笼罩着一切。无情的黑夜在众人的恐慌中慢慢爬了上来。
　　实际上，梅森的人生还很短暂，他之前仅在东田纳西的大雾山度过了童年。最令人感到悲伤的是再也听不到梅森嚷嚷着要去游泳、去捕猎浣熊、去偷西瓜时那一口浓郁的南方口音。当然，这些对于露丝来说如同听希腊语一样陌生。但只有马尔穆特明白：当一个人远离社会多年时，只能用此慰藉自己了。
　　翌日清晨，受伤的人醒了过来，马尔穆恃·基德爬到梅森的耳旁，倾听他那微弱的声音。
   



第17章 寂静的雪野杰克·伦敦 (6)


　　“我们在塔纳纳见面时的情形，如今，你还记得吗？到明年春暖花开时，就整整四年了。那个时候，我对她没有什么感觉，她很美丽，也很诱人。渐渐的，我总是惦念着她，她成了我娴淑的夫人，每当困难当头，她都与我共度难关。提到我们的工作，你很清楚，她是最出色的。你还记得上一次吗？她冒着冰雹大的枪子，穿过麋鹿角的急流，把我们两个人从岩石上解救下来。你还记得曾经努克路凯脱挨饿的事情吗？你还记得她是如何穿过河水，给我们捎信吗？是啊，她确实是我的好夫人，比过去的那个好很多。
　　“你不知道我离过婚吧？我没有跟你说过。是的，过去，我在美国的老家时，结过婚。我来这里，就是因为这个，算起来，我们也是青梅竹马。我离开老家，就是为了给她一个离开我的机会，她做到了。
　　“可是，这跟露丝毫不相干。我原本想多赚一些钱，明年和露丝一起去外面’，可是现在已经太迟了。基德，不要把她送回娘家，让一个女人回娘家，太让她难过了。设想一下，她跟我们一起吃腌肉、豆子、面食和干果，已经四年了，难道现在把她送回去吃鱼和鹿肉吗？她已经融入我们的生活了，明白现在的日子比在娘家生活得好，如果现在让她回去，就是让她受苦。基德，你要照看她，尽快送她回美国。但是，你要记住，如果她想家，就送她回来。
　　“那个孩子也是一样，他跟我们如此亲近，基德，我希望他是一个男孩。设想一下，他是我的骨肉啊，基德。他一定不能留在这里。如果是一个女孩，哦，这是不可能的。卖掉我的皮货，差不多可以买到五千块，我在公司里还有这么多钱。加上我，咱们一起干吧，依我看，咱们可以申请购买一块高地。你要让那个孩子接受良好的教育，还有，基德，最重要的是，不要让他回到这里。这里不是白种人居住的地方。
　　“基德，我快不行了，超不过两三天了，你要继续前进！你必须继续！你要记住，这是我的老婆和孩子。哦，天啊，我只希望他是一个男孩！你不能继续守着我了，我快要死了，我求你了，你继续赶路吧。”
　　“让我再陪你三天吧，”马尔穆特·基德恳求道，“你或许会好起来的，说不定会有奇迹出现。”
　　“不行。”
　　“就三天。”
　　“你一定要走。”
　　“两天怎么样？”
　　“基德，为了我的老婆和孩子，你不要再多说了。”
　　“一天呢？”
　　“不，不行！你必须……”
　　“就等一天，我们还有这些粮食，可以应付的，没准，我还能捕到一只麋鹿呢。”
　　“不……那好吧，就一天，超过一分钟都不行。另外，基德，不要让我孤单地在这里等死，给我一枪，扣一下扳机就可以了。你明白的，设想一下吧，我的亲生孩子，我今生是不能再与他相见了！
　　“把露丝叫过来，我要跟她道别，我要对她说，让她时刻想着孩子，不要等我死去。如果我不告诉她，她或许不会跟你走的。再见了，老朋友，再见！
　　“基德，我说……呃……你在那个小谷旁边的坡上打一个洞。过去，我在那里铲出了四毛钱。
　　“还有，基德……”
　　基德把身子俯得又低了一些，这样可以更清楚地听到他微弱的声音，他的临终忏悔，“我对不起……你明白的……我对不起卡门。”
　　马尔穆特·基德穿上皮夹克，登上雪鞋，把来复枪夹在腋下，让那个女人去她的男人身边哭泣，然后便向森林里走去。他在北极这个地方，从来没有遇到如此不幸的事，可是也从来没有面对这样的困境。抽象一点比喻，这真像一道很清楚的数学题：三个或许会活下来的生命和一个一定会死的人。但是此时此刻，他很犹豫。五年来，他们形影不离。在河上、路上、帐篷里、矿山里，一起面对旷野、洪水和饥荒带来的死亡威胁，他们成了患难与共的朋友。他们的友谊真的很深厚，因此，当露丝来到他们中间时，他产生了一丝妒意。但是现在，这种友谊被他亲手斩断了。
　　虽然他只希望找到一只麋鹿，仅仅一只足矣，但是，所有的野兽都离开了。天色渐暗，这个疲惫不堪的男人，只好空着双手，哀伤地向帐篷走去。但是，狗的狂吠声和露丝的尖叫声让他迅速奔跑起来。他冲进宿营地时就看到露丝站在一群狂吠的狗中间挥舞着斧头。那群狗不遵守主人的命令，正在一起冲过去抢夺粮食。他马上拿起枪支，加入战斗，然后，这种自然生态循环的老戏，就像在原始时代那样残酷地上演了。枪支同板斧以各自的一个规律上下飞舞，有时打到中间，有时打空。那些瞪着狰狞的眼睛的狗，正从狗牙缝中流着口涎，迅速地扑来扑去。人与兽为了争夺主权，开始了一场惨烈的战斗。于是，这群败下阵的狗趴在火堆旁，舔舐着自己的伤口，时不时地对着星星，哀叫着自己的痛苦。
　　那些狗吃掉了全部的干鲑鱼，前面还有两百多英里的旷野，仅仅剩下了五磅面粉，露丝来到她的丈夫的身边。马尔穆特·基德找到了一只还有一些余温的狗，割掉了它的肉，并用斧头劈碎了它的脑壳。基德仔细地藏好了每一块肉，把狗皮和没有用的杂碎扔给了那些之前还是它的伙伴的狗吃掉了。早晨，又发生了新情况。那群狗互相争斗起来，只剩下奄奄一息的卡门，已经被它们扑倒了。用鞭子打它们，它们也不理睬。即使它们被打得嗷嗷直叫，还是把那只狗的骨头、皮毛和剩下的一切都吃得干干净净。
　　马尔穆特·基德边干活，边听着梅森的声音，因为梅森又回到了田纳西州，正在跟他儿时的朋友们聊天呢：基德充分利用旁边的松树，快速地完成了手里的活，露丝看着他搭棚子，同时还与猎人们一起储存兽肉，以免被狼和狗吃掉。他分别将两棵小松树的树梢面对面地弯下来，差不多快碰到地面时，就用鹿皮捆紧。然后，他又把梅森身上的皮褥子捆紧，把绳子的两头捆在弯着的松树上。这样一来，只要用猎刀砍下去，松树就会反方向弹出去，把他的身体弹到半空中。露丝听从了她的丈夫的遗愿。悲伤的女人，她接受的顺从教育十分深刻。从孩童时开始，她就十分遵从造物主的旨意，她眼里的女人都是一样的，生来就要顺从：当时，她得到了基德的允许，才可以痛哭一场，她亲吻了丈夫——她本族的人是没有这个习惯的——于是，基德把她领到第一座雪橇前，给她穿上雪鞋。她彷徨并且本能地抓住雪橇舵杆和狗鞭，吆喝了一声，就赶着雪橇犬上路了。然后，基德回到昏迷的梅森身边，当露丝的身影渐渐消失之后，他依然蹲在火堆旁边，等待着、祷告着，希望他的朋友早点死去。
　　一个人怀着一种痛楚的心情孤独地待在寂静的雪野中，这可是一件痛苦的事啊！如果是在阴暗的寂静地方，倒也还可以，黑暗包围着你，好像给了你保护，同时又向你吐露了一千种小可触摸的同情：可是在这片青色的天空下，这一片凛冽的白色寂静则显得十分冷酷了。
　　一小时过去了，两小时过去了……梅森还是没有死。到了中午，太阳在南方的地平线下，露出了一个小边，只有一片火红的光芒照在天际中，稍微地表现了一下，就缩了回去。马尔穆特·基德忽然醒了，起身来到了朋友的身边。他环视四周，寂静的雪野在耻笑他，他打了个寒战。只听一声枪响，梅森就被弹到他的空中坟墓去了。然而此时，马尔穆特·基德鞭打着那些雪橇犬飞快地奔跑着，在这片寂静的雪野中飞奔而去。




第18章 变色龙安东·契诃夫 (1)


　　a  chameleon
　　anton chekhov
　　the police superintendent otchumyelov is walking across the market square wearing a new overcoat and carrying a parcel under his arm. a red-haired policeman strides after him with a sieve full of confiscated gooseberries in his hands. there is silence all around. not a soul in the square... the open doors of the shops and taverns look out upon god’s world disconsolately, like hungry mouths; there is not even a beggar near them.
　　“so you bite, you damned brute？” otchumyelov hears suddenly. “lads, don’t let him go！ biting is prohibited nowadays！ hold him！ ah...ah！”
　　there is the sound of a dog yelping. otchumyelov looks in the direction of the sound and sees a dog, hopping on three legs and looking about her, run out of pitchugin’s timber-yard. a man in a starched cotton shirt, with his waistcoat unbuttoned, is chasing her. he runs after her, and throwing his body forward falls down and seizes the dog by her hind legs. once more there is a yelping and a shout of “don’t let go！” sleepy countenances are protruded from the shops, and soon a crowd, which seems to have sprung out of the earth, is gathered round the timber-yard.
　　“it looks like a row, your honour...” says the policeman.
　　otchumyelov makes a half turn to the left and strides towards the crowd. he sees the aforementioned man in the unbuttoned waistcoat standing close by the gate of the timber-yard, holding his right hand in the air and displaying a bleeding finger to the crowd. on his half-drunken face there is plainly written: “i’ll pay you out, you rogue！” and indeed the very finger has the look of a flag of victory. in this man otchumyelov recognises hryukin, the goldsmith. the culprit who has caused the sensation, a white borzoy puppy with a sharp muzzle and a yellow patch on her back, is sitting on the ground with her fore-paws outstretched in the middle of the crowd, trembling all over. there is an expression of misery and terror in her tearful eyes.
　　“what’s it all about？” otchumyelov inquires, pushing his way through the crowd. “what are you here for？ why are you waving your finger？ who was it shouted？”
　　“i was walking along here, not interfering with anyone, your honour,” hryukin begins, coughing into his fist. “i was talking about firewood to mitry mitritch, when this low brute for no rhyme or reason bit my finger...you must excuse me, i am a working man... mine is fine work. i must have damages, for i shan’t be able to use this finger for a week, may be...it’s not even the law, your honour, that one should put up with it from a beast...if everyone is going to be bitten, life won’t be worth living...”
　　“h’m. very good,” says otchumyelov sternly, coughing and raising his eyebrows.“very good. whose dog is it？ i won’t let this pass！ i’ll teach them to let their dogs run all over the place！ it’s time these gentry were looked after, if they won’t obey the regulations！ when he’s fined, the blackguard, i’ll teach him what it means to keep dogs and such stray cattle！ i’ll give him a lesson！...yeldyrin,” cries the superintendent, addressing the policeman, “find out whose dog this is and draw up a report！ and the dog must be strangled. without delay！ it’s sure to be mad...whose dog is it, i ask？”
　　“i fancy it’s general zhigalov’s,” says someone in the crowd.
　　“general zhigalov’s, h’m...help me off with my coat, yeldyrin...it’s frightfully hot！ it must be a sign of rain...there’s one thing i can’t make out, how it came to bite you？” otchumyelov turns to hryukin, “surely it couldn’t reach your finger. it’s a little dog, and you are a great hulking fellow！ you must have scratched your finger with a nail, and then the idea struck you to get damages for it. we all know...your sort！ i know you devils！”
　　“he put a cigarette in her face, your honour, for a joke, and she had the sense to snap at him...he is a nonsensical fellow, your honour！”
　　“that’s a lie, squinteye！ you didn’t see, so why tell lies about it？ his honour is awise gentleman, and will see who is telling lies and who is telling the truth, as in god’s sight...and if i am lying let the court decide. it’s written in the law...we are all equal nowadays. my own brother is in the gendarmes... let me tell you...”
　　“don’t argue！”
　　“no, that’s not the general’s dog,” says the policeman, with profound conviction, “the general hasn’t got one like that. his are mostly setters.”
　　“do you know that for a fact？”
　　“yes, your honour.”
　　“i know it, too. the general has valuable dogs, thoroughbred, and this is goodness knows what！ no coat, no shape...a low creature. and to keep a dog like that！...where’s the sense of it. if a dog like that were to turn up in petersburg or moscow, do you know what would happen？ they would not worry about the law, they would strangle it in a twinkling！ you’ve been injured, hryukin, and we can’t let the matter drop...we must give them a lesson！ it is high time！”




第19章 变色龙安东·契诃夫 (2)


　　“yet maybe it is the general’s,” says the policeman, thinking aloud. “it’s not written on its face...i saw one like it the other day in his yard.”
　　“it is the general’s, that’s certain！ ” says a voice in the crowd.
　　“h’m, help me on with my overcoat, yeldyrin, my lad...the wind’s getting up...i am cold... you take it to the general’s, and inquire there. say i found it and sent it. and tell them not to let it out into the street...it may be a valuable dog, and if every swine goes sticking a cigar in its mouth, it will soon be ruined. a dog is a delicate animal...and you put your hand down, you blockhead. it’s no use your displaying your fool of a finger. it’s your own fault...”
　　“here comes the general’s cook, ask him...hi, prohor！ come here, my dear man！ look at this dog...is it one of yours？”
　　“what an idea！ we have never had one like that！”
　　“there’s no need to waste time asking,” says otchumyelov. “it’s a stray dog！ there’s no need to waste time talking about it...since he says it’s a stray dog, a straydog it is...it must be destroyed, that’s all about it.”
　　“it is not our dog,” prohor goes on. “it belongs to the general’s brother, who arrived the other day. our master does not care for hounds. but his honour is fond of them...”
　　“you don’t say his excellency’s brother is here？ vladimir ivanitch？” inquires otchumyelov, and his whole face beams with an ecstatic smile. ”’well, i never！ and i didn’t know！ has he come on a visit？
　　“yes.”
　　“well, i never...he couldn’t stay away from his brother...and there i didn’t know！ so this is his honour’s dog？ delighted to hear it...take it. it’s not a bad pup...a lively creature...snapped at this fellow’s finger！ ha-ha-ha...come, why are you shivering？ rrr...rrrr...the rogue’s angry...a nice little pup.”
　　prohor calls the dog, and walks away from the timber-yard with her. the crowd laughs at hryukin.
　　“i’ll make you smart yet！” otchumyelov threatens him, and wrapping himself in his greatcoat, goes on his way across the square.
　　变色龙
　　[俄国] 安东·契诃夫
　　安东·契诃夫（1860-1904），19世纪末俄国伟大的批判现实主义作家，情趣隽永、文笔犀利的幽默讽刺大师，短篇小说巨匠，著名的剧作家。他的作品大都与衰退时期的俄国有关。人们把他比作法国的莫泊桑。他能够抓住生活中的一个片段，寥寥数语，就可以把一个人物的性格和心灵刻画得入木三分。其代表作《变色龙》《套中人》堪称俄国文学史上精湛而完美的艺术珍品。
　　警官奥楚蔑洛夫穿着崭新的军大衣，胳膊下夹着小包，正步行穿过集市的广场。一个红头发的警察大步流星地跟在他的身后，手里拿着个筛子，里面盛满了没收来的醋栗。广场四周静悄悄的，连个人影儿都没有……商店和酒馆的门如同一张张饥饿的嘴巴，无精打采地向上帝创造的这个世界敞开着，店门附近甚至连一个乞丐都没有。
　　“你竟然咬人,该死的家伙？”奥楚蔑洛夫突然听到了吵闹声，“伙计们，别让它跑了！这会儿就咬人，那可不行，抓住它！哎哟……哎哟！”
　　狗狂叫了起来。奥楚蔑洛夫闻声望去，只见从商人皮楚金的木材场里窜出来一只狗，那狗用三条腿吃力地跑着，还不时地四处张望。一个男子穿着浆棉布衬衫，外面套一件没系扣子的马甲，在后边紧追着这条狗。他身体往前一跃，扑倒在地，抓住了狗的后腿。紧接着又传来了狗的狂吠声和人的叫喊声：“别让它跑了！”一张张带着睡意的脸从各个小铺里纷纷探了出来。人们像是从地底下钻出来似的，马上围到了木材场门口。
　　“看起来出乱子了，警官！……”警察说。
　　奥楚蔑洛微微左转身，迈步走向人群。他看到先前那个被狗追的敞开扣子穿马甲的人站在木材场门口，举着右手，向人群展示那只被狗咬了的血淋淋的手指。他半醉的脸似乎在向人群示意：“我要扒了你的皮，你这个混蛋！”而那根手指头恰似一面胜利的旗帜。奥楚蔑洛夫认出了这个人，他是金匠赫留金。这场骚乱的罪魁祸首是一只长有尖尖的嘴巴，背后还有一块黄色斑点的白毛俄国小猎狗。此时它正坐在人群中间的空地上，前腿伸开，浑身颤抖，泪汪汪的双眼露出痛苦和恐惧的表情。
　　“出什么事了？”奥楚蔑洛夫挤到人群中，问道，“你在这儿干什么呢？你干吗举着你那手指头？是谁在大吵大嚷呢？”
　　“我走路走得好好的，没妨碍任何人，警官。”赫留金把空拳头凑到嘴边咳着说，“我正跟米特利·米特利奇谈木柴的事，突然这个畜生无缘无故把我手指头咬了一口……请原谅我，我是个干活人……而且干的都是细致活。我现在受伤了，最起码得一周不能用这只手来工作，所以我请求赔付……尊敬的警官先生，也许法律并没有相关条款，那么人受了畜生的害就该忍气吞声吗？……要是人人都要挨狗咬，活在这世上也没什么意思了……”
　　“嗯！那是，”奥楚蔑洛夫咳嗽着，扬了扬眉毛严肃地说，“那是。这是谁家的狗呀？这种事我可不能坐视不管。我要给那些放狗出来闯祸的人点颜色看看！也该管管那些不愿遵规守纪的老爷们了！等到挨罚了，这混蛋才知道把狗这些牲畜放出来有什么下场！我一定要教训教训他……叶尔狄林，”警官命令警察道，“你，去调查一下这是谁家的狗，然后报告上来！得打死这条狗，不得延误！这一定是条疯狗……我问你们：这是谁家的狗？”
　　“好像是席加洛夫将军家的！”人群里有人说道。
　　“席加洛夫将军家的？哦！……叶尔狄林，帮我把大衣脱掉……太热了！一定是要下雨了……有件事我不明白，它怎么能咬到你呢？”奥楚蔑洛夫转身对着赫留金继续说，“它不可能够得到你的手指，它只是只小狗，而你却是个那么高大的家伙！你一定是用钉子把手指划破的，而后却陷害这只小狗，异想天开地想要狗主人给你赔偿。我们都知道……你的伎俩！你这种可恶的人啊！”
　　“他把雪茄戳到小狗的脸上，寻它开心，而它不甘心被他戏弄……他是个无聊的家伙，警官！”
　　“胡说八道，独眼龙！你眼睛看不见，为什么胡说？警官是个英明人，看得出来谁在撒谎，谁在说实话，公正的上帝也看在眼里……我是否在撒谎，让调解法官去做裁定。法律上写的很清楚……现如今法律面前人人平等……不瞒您说，……我弟弟就是个宪兵……”
　　“别废话！”
　　“不，这不是将军家的狗。”警察肯定地说，“将军家没有这样的狗，他家的狗大多是塞特种狗。”
　　“你确定吗？”
　　“我确定，警官。”
　　“我也知道，将军家的狗都是名贵的良种，而这条呢，鬼才知道是什么东西！皮色不好，样子也不好看……下贱的家伙。……你也不想想，他老人家会养这么一条狗吗？要是这样的一条狗出现在彼得堡或莫斯科，你知道会有什么下场吗？那儿才不会顾及什么法律呢，眨眼工夫就让它断气！赫留金，你受苦了，这件事不能放任不管……该给他们个教训了！是时候了！”
　　“不过也有可能是将军家的狗……”警察想了想，大声地说道。“它是谁家的又没写在脸上……我前几天在他家院子里见过这么一条狗。”
　　“是将军家的，没错！”人群里有人说。
　　“嗯！叶尔狄林，帮我把大衣穿上吧……起风了……怪冷的……你带着这条狗到将军家问一下。你说我找到它，派你送去的……告诉他们以后不要再把狗放到街上来。它或许是条名贵的狗，如果每个卑鄙的家伙都拿雪茄去戳它，要不了多久它就会被戳死的。狗是娇贵的动物嘛……把手放下，你这个蠢货！不必把你的蠢手指头摆出来！这都是你的错……”
　　“将军家的厨师来了,问问他吧……喂,普罗霍尔！过来，亲爱的！看看这条狗……是你们家的吗？”
　　“竟瞎说！我们从来也没养过这样的狗！”
　　“那就没必要再浪费时间了，”奥楚蔑洛夫说，“这是条野狗！少废话了……既然他说不是他家的，那它就是条野狗……弄死它算了。”
　　“这不是我们家的狗，”普罗霍尔继续说，“是将军哥哥的狗，他前几天到我们这儿了。将军不喜欢这种狗，他哥哥却喜欢……”
　　“难道说，他老人家的哥哥，符拉季米尔·伊凡内奇来了？”奥楚蔑洛夫满脸堆笑地问道，“哦，天啊！不得了了，我还不知道呢！他要在这住一段时间吧？”
　　“是的。”
　　“哦，天啊！……他可别走了……我还不知道他来呢！那么这是他老人家的狗了？很高兴听到这些……把它带回去吧。它很不错……一只活泼可爱的小狗……它把这家伙的手指咬了一口！哈哈哈！……咦，你为什么发抖呢？呜呜……呜呜。这淘气鬼生气了……多可爱的小狗。”
　　普罗霍尔把狗叫过去，带它离开了木材场。那群人都嘲笑赫留金。
　　“我早晚得收拾你！”奥楚蔑洛夫威胁他道，然后裹紧大衣，径自穿过市集的广场走了。
wwＷ．lzuｏwen.com．



第20章 竞选州长马克·吐温 (1)


　　running for governor
　　mark twain
　　a few months ago i was nominated for governor of the great state of new york, to run against mr. john t. smith and mr. blank j. blank on an independent ticket. i somehow felt that i had one prominent advantage over these gentlemen, and that was—good character. it was easy to see by the newspapers that if ever they had known what it was to bear a good name, that time had gone by. it was plain that in these latter years they had become familiar with all manner of shameful crimes. but at the very moment that i was exalting my advantage and joying in it in secret, there was a muddy undercurrent of discomfort “riling” the deeps of my happiness, and that was—the having to hear my name bandied about in familiar connection with those of such people. i grew more and more disturbed. finally i wrote my grandmother about it. her answer came quick and sharp. she said: you have never done one single thing in all your life to be ashamed of—not one. look at the newspapers—look at them and comprehend what sort of characters messrs. smith and blank are, and then see if you are willing to lower yourself to their level and enter a public canvass with them.
　　it was my very thought！ i did not sleep a single moment that night. but, after all, i could not recede.
　　i was fully committed, and must go on with the fight.
　　as i was looking listlessly over the papers at breakfast i came across this paragraph, and i may truly say i never was so confounded before.
　　perjury.—perhaps, now that mr. mark twain is before the people as a candidate for governor, he will condescend to explain how he came to be convicted of perjury by thirty-four witnesses in wakawak, cochin china, in 1863, the intent of which perjury being to rob a poor native widow and her helpless family of a meager plantain-patch, their only stay and support in their bereavement and desolation.
　　mr. twain owes it to himself, as well as to the great people whose suffrages he asks, to clear this matter up. will he do it?
　　i thought i should burst with amazement！ such a cruel, heartless charge！ i never had seen cochin china！ i never had heard of wakawak！ i didn’t know a plantain-patch from a kangaroo！ i did not know what to do. i was crazed and helpless. i let the day slip away without doing anything at all. the next morning the same paper had his—nothing more:
　　significant.—mr. twain, it will be observed, is suggestively silent about the cochin china perjury.
　　[mem.—during the rest of the campaign this paper never referred to me in any other way than as “the infamous perjurer twain”.
　　next came the gazette, with this:
　　wanted to know—will the new candidate for governor deign to explain to certain of his fellow-citizens who are suffering to vote for him！ the little circumstance of his cabin-mates in montana losing small valuables from time to time, until at last, these things having been invariably found on mr. twain’s person or in his “trunk” (newspaper he rolled his traps in), they felt compelled to give him a friendly admonition for his own good, and so tarred and feathered him, and rode him on a rail; and then advised him to leave a permanent vacuum in the place he usually occupied in the camp. will he do this?
　　could anything be more deliberately malicious than that? for i never was in montana in my life.
　　[after this, this journal customarily spoke of me as, “twain, the montana thief.”]
　　i got to picking up papers apprehensively—much as one would lift a desired blanket which he had some idea might have a rattlesnake under it.
　　one day this met my eye:
   www.ｌzuoＷen．Ｃom



第21章 竞选州长马克·吐温 (2)


　　the lie nailed.—by the sworn affidavits of michael o’flanagan, esq., of the five points, and mr. snub rafferty and mr. catty mulligan, of water street, it is established that mr. mark twain’s vile statement that the lamented grandfather of our noble standard-bearer, blank j. blank, was hanged for highway robbery, is a brutal and gratuitous lie, without a shadow of foundation in fact. it is disheartening to virtuousmen to see such shameful means resorted to achieve political success as the attacking of the dead in their graves, and defiling their honored names with slander. when we think of the anguish this miserable falsehood must cause the innocent relatives and friends of the deceased, we are almost driven to incite an outraged and insulted public to summary and unlawful vengeance upon the traducer. but no！ let us leave him to the agony of a lacerated conscience (though if passion should get the better of the public, and in its blind fury they should do the traducer bodily injury, it is but too obvious that no jury could convict and no court punish the perpetrators of the deed).
　　the ingenious closing sentence had the effect of moving me out of bed with despatch that night, and out at the back door also, while the “outraged and insulted public” surged in the front way, breaking furniture and windows in their righteous indignation as they came, and taking off such property as they could carry when they went. and yet i can lay my hand upon the book and say that i never slandered mr. blank’s grandfather. more: i had never even heard of him or mentioned him up to that day and date.
　　[i will state, in passing, that the journal above quoted from always referred to me afterward as “twain, the body-snatcher.”]
　　the next newspaper article that attracted my attention was the following:
　　a sweet candidate.—mr. mark twain, who was to make such a blighting speech at the mass-meeting of the independents last night, didn’t come to time！ a telegram from his physician stated that he had been knocked down by a runaway team, and his leg broken in two places—sufferer lying in great agony, and so forth, and so forth, and a lot more bosh of the same sort. and the independents tried hard to swallow the wretched subterfuge, and pretend that they did not know what was the real reason of the absence of the abandoned creature whom they denominate their standard-bearer. a certain man was seen to reel into mr. twain’s hotel last night in a state of beastly intoxication. it is the imperative duty of the independents to prove that this besotted brute was not mark twain himself. we have them at last！ this is a case that admits of no shirking. the voice of the people demands in thunder tones, “who was that man?”
　　it was incredible, absolutely incredible, for a moment, that it was really my name that was coupled with this disgraceful suspicion. three long years had passed over my head since i had tasted ale, beer, wine or liquor or any kind.
　　[it shows what effect the times were having on me when i say that i saw myself, confidently dubbed “mr. delirium tremens twain” in the next issue of that journal without a pang—notwithstanding i knew that with monotonous fidelity the paper would go on calling me so to the very end.]
　　by this time anonymous letters were getting to be an important part of my mail matter. this form was common:
　　how about that old woman you kiked of your premises which was beging?
　　pol. pry.
　　and this:
　　there is things which you have done which is unbeknowens to anybody but me. you better trot out a few dots, to yours truly, or you’ll hear through the papers from
　　handy andy.
　　this is about the idea. i could continue them till the reader was surfeited, if desirable.
　　shortly the principal republican journal “convicted” me of wholesale bribery, and the leading democratic paper “nailed” an aggravated case of blackmailing to me.
　　[in this way i acquired two additional names: “twain the filthy corruptionist”and “twain the loathsome embracer”.]
　　by this time there had grown to be such a clamor for an “answer” to all the dreadful charges that were laid to me that the editors and leaders of my party said it would be political ruin for me to remain silent any longer. as if to make their appeal the more imperative, the following appeared in one of the papers the very next day:
　　behold the man！—the independent candidate still maintains silence. because he dare not speak. every accusation against him has been amply proved, and they have been indorsed and reindorsed by his own eloquent silence, till at this day he stands forever convicted. look upon your candidate, independents！ look upon the infamous perjurer！ the montana thief ！ the body-snatcher！ contemplate your incarnate delirium tremens！ your filthy corruptionist！ your loathsome embracer！ gaze upon him—ponder him well—and then say if you can give your honest votes to a creature who has earned this dismal array of titles by his hideous crimes, and dares not open his mouth in denial of any one of them！
www.7wenxue.com下…… 书 ……网



第22章 竞选州长马克·吐温 (3)


　　there was no possible way of getting out of it, and so, in deep humiliation, i set about preparing to “answer” a mass of baseless charges and mean and wicked falsehoods. but i never finished the task, for the very next morning a paper came out with a new horror, a fresh malignity, and seriously charged me with burning a lunatic asylum with all its inmates, because it obstructed the view from my house. this threw me into a sort of panic. then came the charge of poisoning my uncle to get his property, with an imperative demand that the grave should be opened. this drove me to the verge of distraction. on top of this i was accused of employing toothless and incompetent old relatives to prepare the food for the foundling’s hospital when i warden. i was wavering—wavering. and at last, as a due and fitting climax to the shameless persecution that party rancor had inflicted upon me, nine little toddling children, of all shades of color and degrees of raggedness, were taught to rush onto the platform at a public meeting, and clasp me around the legs and call me pa！
　　i gave it up. i hauled down my colors and surrendered. i was not equal to the requirements of a gubernatorial campaign in the state of new york, and so i sent in my withdrawal from the candidacy, and in bitterness of spirit signed it:
　　“truly yours, once a decent man, but now mark twain, lp., m.t., b.s., d.t., f.c., and l.e.”
　　竞选州长
　　[美国] 马克·吐温
　　数月前，纽约州选举州长时，我被提名为候选人，与斯坦华脱·勒·伍福特先生和约翰·特·霍夫曼先生自由竞选。不知为什么，我总觉得自己比起这两位先生来，有一个显著的有利条件，那就是——优秀的人品。很显然，看报纸就知道：这两位绅士自知爱护名声的时代已经过去。最近几年来，他们对于各种无耻罪行似乎已经习以为常了。但是，在这个时候，尽管我暗自为自己的有利条件欢欣雀跃，但总有一股不安搅动我的心弦，那就是 ——我不得不让自己的名字与此类人搅在一起四处传播。我心里越来越乱，最后写信给祖母，向她说起此事。很快，我收到了她言辞颇为苛刻的回信，她说：“此生你为人处事，从未愧对他人——从未有过。看看报纸——看看伍福特和霍夫曼究竟何许人也，再想想,你是否愿意降低自己，与此类人为伍，与此类人一决高下。”
　　我内心的想法正是如此！那晚我辗转难眠。但是，不管怎样，我不能就这样放弃。
　　我已身陷其中，必须继续战斗。
　　吃早餐时，我无精打采地翻阅报纸。无意中看到这样一段话，顿时感到前所未有的惊慌：
　　伪证罪——现在马克·吐温先生以州长候选人的身份出现在公众面前，那么或许他应该谦逊地解释一下如下事件：1863年，在交趾支那的瓦卡瓦克，34人指证马克·吐温先生犯有伪证罪:他企图掠夺一小块香蕉种植地，那是一位贫穷的寡妇和她无助的家人唯一的生活来源。
　　为了他自己，更为了那些他自己恳请投票选举他的伟大人民，马克·吐温先生有责任澄清此事，他会这样做吗？
　　我惊讶得目瞪口呆！竟有如此残酷、无情的指控！我从未到过交趾支那！什么瓦卡瓦克，更是闻所未闻！至于香蕉种植地，我甚至都不知道它跟袋鼠有什么区别！我不知所措，简直快要疯了。那天，我让日子悄无声息地流逝，什么都没做。第二天早晨，这家报纸只说了这样一句话——再无他言：
　　意味深长——众人都注意到：对于交趾支那伪证案件，吐温先生没有任何言辞，令人深省。
　　（备注——从此以后，这家报纸在竞选活动中提到我，必称“声名狼藉的伪证犯吐温”。）
　　接下来，《政府公报》里有一段这样的话：
　　需要查清——新任州长候选人能否屈尊向追随他的市民们（急于投他一票的人们）解释一下：在蒙大那州野营时，马克·吐温先生的室友们经常丢些细小的贵重物品，而后，人们总会在吐温先生的私人物品或“箱子”（他用来卷随身物品的报纸）里找到这些东西。大家为他好，只是善意地告诫他。结果他全身被涂满焦油，粘上羽毛，并被永远地赶出帐篷，让出其铺位。他会对此做出解释吗？
　　还有比这更用心险恶的控告吗？因为，我这辈子还从未去过蒙大那州。
　　（按惯例，这家报纸此后提到我，就叫“蒙大那的小偷吐温”。）
　　我一拿起报纸，就不免心惊胆战——好像你想睡觉时，掀开毯子，总担心里面有条蛇似的。
　　我又看到这样一段话：
　　谎言已被揭穿——五方位区的密凯尔·奥弗拉纳根先生、华脱街的吉特·彭斯先生和约翰·艾伦先生已宣誓证实。根据他们的誓词，马克·吐温先生曾声称我们尊贵的领袖约翰·特·霍夫曼先生的祖父因拦路抢劫而被处死的论调已被确认纯属谎言。他为了达到政治上的成功，而不惜采取卑劣手段，毁谤先人，玷污他们的英名，实在令人遗憾。他卑劣的谎言必定会使逝者无辜的亲友蒙冤受辱，这种想法几乎迫使我们激起愤怒的、被侮辱的公众，毫不犹豫地用非法手段报复诽谤者。但是，我们不能这样！让他在道德的强烈谴责中饱受煎熬吧！（但是，如果公众激愤难平，卤莽行事，可能会对诽谤者进行人身伤害，那么很明显，任何陪审员或法庭都不能对此类作恶者定罪或予以惩罚。）
　　最后这句极富创造性的话，吓得我那天晚上从床上爬起，从后门溜出去。因为“愤怒的被侮辱的公众”从我家前门涌进来，满怀激愤地砸坏了家具和门窗，所有能带走的财物也统统被他们卷走了。可是，我可以把手按在《圣经》上起誓，我从未诽谤过霍夫曼州长的祖父，甚至都没有听说过他，也从未谈起过他。
　　（顺便提一句，那家报纸刊登了这则新闻后，提到我时，前面总会加一个“拐尸犯吐温”的称号。）
　　那家报纸接下来的一篇文章吸引了我的注意：
　　好个候选人——昨晚的独立党民众大会上，马克·吐温先生本打算作一次诋毁竞争对手的演说，但他却未如期而来。他的医生传来一份电报，说他被几匹狂奔的马撞倒在地，腿部两处受伤——痛苦不堪地躺在床上等等类似的胡言乱语。这样拙劣的托词，独立党人也只好竭力掩饰。至于被他们提名为领袖的这个人——这个放荡不羁的家伙未曾出席大会的真正原因，他们都假装不知道。昨天晚上，一个可靠的人看见一个醉鬼摇摇晃晃地进入马克·吐温先生所住的旅馆内。证明那个醉汉不是马克·吐温先生本人，是独立党人不可推卸的责任。我们终于抓住他们了！这件事已毋庸质疑！人们的控诉响彻云霄：“那个人是谁?”
　　真令人难以置信，简直不可思议，我的名字竟然与这个可耻的猜疑联系在一起。整整三年了，我从未沾过一滴啤酒、葡萄酒或其他任何一种酒。
　　（在这家报纸以后的期刊上，我看见自己的名字前都加上“酒疯子吐温先生”。我知道它会一直这样称呼下去，但我却没有感到一丝痛苦，可见其影响有多大。）
　　这个时候，匿名信占到了我所有邮件中最主要的部分，一般是用这样的格式：
　　那个被你从寓所门口一脚踢开的老婆婆，现在怎样了？
　　好管闲事者
　　还有这样写的：
　　除了我，没人知道你干的好事，你最好掏点钱来孝敬我，否则，报上见。
　　惹不起
　　内容大都如此，如果读者还想听，我可以接着引用下去，直到看得你恶心为止。
　　不久以后，我又被共和党的主要报纸“判定”犯有重大贿赂罪，而民主党的要报又在我头上“栽赃”了一桩勒索案，并大肆渲染。
　　（这样一来，我又被扣上了两个罪名：“肮脏的贿赂犯吐温”和“令人恶心的讹诈犯吐温”。）
　　到这个时候，公众也一片哗然，呼声震天，要求我对那些可怕的指控作一个“答复”。就连我们党的报刊编辑和领导们都对我说，如果我再缄默不语，政治生涯将就此终结，这好像是要促使他们作出更蛮横的控诉似的。就在第二天，一家报纸上出现了这样一段话：
　　明察此人！——独立党的这位候选人始终保持沉默，因为他不敢发表言论。控告他的每一条罪名都证据确凿，它们已完全得到了证实，并且他意味深长的缄默也足以说明一切，直到今天，他的罪名始终成立。看看你们这位候选人吧！独立党的同胞们！看看这臭名昭著的伪证犯！蒙大那的小偷！拐尸犯！好好审视这个精神错乱的酒疯子吧！你们这位肮脏的贿赂犯！令人恶心的讹诈犯！好好看着他——仔细打量——然后看你们是否愿意把自己最真诚的选票，投给这样一个犯下丑恶罪行而获得一大串令人心痛的称号，却始终不敢张口否认任何一条控告的家伙。
　　我实在无力摆脱这种困境。面对那一堆毫无根据的指控和卑鄙的谎言，我只好满怀耻辱地准备予以“答复”，但这个任务我始终无法完成。因为，一家报纸第二天又刊登了一桩更新的既恐怖又狠毒的案例，更严厉地控诉我，说我放火烧毁了一座疯人院，院里的病人无一幸免，只因为它挡住了我家看风景的视线。这让我惶惶不可终日。后来，又有人控告我毒死自己的叔叔，霸占了他的财产。他们还极为严肃地要求开棺验尸。我简直要崩溃了。更有甚者，竟然控告我雇佣老掉了牙、无能的老亲戚为自己负责的育婴堂做饭。我开始把持不住了——摇摆不定。最后，这种无耻的迫害达到了高潮：9个蹒跚学步的幼儿，肤色、种族各异，他们穿着各种破烂不堪的衣服被人唆使冲上一次民众大会的讲台，抱住我的双腿，叫我“爸爸”！
　　我放弃了，我降旗宣布投降。我达不到参加纽约州州长竞选所要求的条件。所以，我发表声明，决定退出竞选，我痛苦地签下了自己的名字：
　　“你忠实的朋友，以前是正派人，可现在却成了伪证犯、小偷、拐尸犯、酒疯子、贿赂犯和讹诈犯的马克·吐温。”




第23章 阿拉比詹姆斯·乔伊斯 (1)


　　araby
　　james joyce
　　north richmond street, being blind, was a quiet street except at the hour when the christian brothers’ school set the boys free. an uninhabited house of two storeys stood at the blind end, detached from its neighbours in a square ground. the other houses of the street, conscious of decent lives within them, gazed at one another with brown imperturbable faces.
　　the former tenant of our house, a priest, had died in the back drawing-room. air, musty from having been long enclosed, hung in all the rooms, and the waste room behind the kitchen was littered with old useless papers. among these i found a few paper-covered books, the pages of which were curled and damp: the abbot, by walter scott, the devout communicant, and the memoirs of vidocq. i liked the last best because its leaves were yellow. the wild garden behind the house contained a central apple-tree and a few straggling bushes, under one of which i found the late tenant’s rusty bicycle-pump. he had been a very charitable priest; in his will he had left all his money to institutions and the furniture of his house to his sister.
　　when the short days of winter came dusk fell before we had well eaten our dinners. when we met in the street the houses had grown sombre. the space of sky above us was the colour of ever-changing violet and towards it the lamps of the street lifted their feeble lanterns. the cold air stung us and we played till our bodies glowed. our shouts echoed in the silent street. the career of our play brought us through the dark muddy lanes behind the houses where we ran the gauntlet of the rough tribes from the cottages, to the back doors of the dark dripping gardens where odours arosefrom the ashpits, to the dark odorous stables where a coachman smoothed and combed the horse or shook music from the buckled harness. when we returned to the street, light from the kitchen windows had filled the areas. if my uncle was seen turning the corner, we hid in the shadow until we had seen him safely housed. or if mangan’s sister came out on the doorstep to call her brother in to his tea, we watched her from our shadow peer up and down the street. we waited to see whether she would remain or go in and, if she remained, we left our shadow and walked up to mangan’s steps resignedly. she was waiting for us, her figure defined by the light from the half-opened door. her brother always teased her before he obeyed, and i stood by the railings looking at her. her dress swung as she moved her body, and the soft rope of her hair tossed from side to side.
　　every morning i lay on the floor in the front parlour watching her door. the blind was pulled down to within an inch of the sash so that i could not be seen. when she came out on the doorstep my heart leaped. i ran to the hall, seized my books and followed her. i kept her brown figure always in my eye and, when we came near the point at which our ways diverged, i quickened my pace and passed her. this happened morning after morning. i had never spoken to her, except for a few casual words, and yet her name was like a summons to all my foolish blood.
　　her image accompanied me even in places the most hostile to romance. on saturday evenings when my aunt went marketing i had to go to carry some of the parcels. we walked through the flaring streets, jostled by drunken men and bargaining women, amid the curses of labourers, the shrill litanies of shop-boys who stood on guard by the barrels of pigs’ cheeks, the nasal chanting of street-singers, who sang a come-all-you about o’donovan rossa, or a ballad about the troubles in our native land. these noises converged in a single sensation of life for me: i imagined that i bore my chalice safely through a throng of foes. her name sprang to my lips at moments in strange prayers and praises which i myself did not understand. my eyes were often full of tears (i could not tell why) and at times a flood from my heart seemed to pour itself out into my bosom. i thought little of the future. i did not know whether i would ever speak to her or not or, if i spoke to her, how i could tell her of my confused adoration. but my body was like a harp and her words and gestures were like fingers running upon the wires.
　　one evening i went into the back drawing-room in which the priest had died. it was a dark rainy evening and there was no sound in the house. through one of the broken panes i heard the rain impinge upon the earth, the fine incessant needles of water playing in the sodden beds. some distant lamp or lighted window gleamed below me. i was thankful that i could see so little. all my senses seemed to desire to veil themselves and, feeling that i was about to slip from them, i pressed the palms of my hands together until they trembled, murmuring: ’o love！ o love！’ many times.
　　at last she spoke to me. when she addressed the first words to me i was so confused that i did not know what to answer. she asked me was i going to araby. i forgot whether i answered yes or no. it would be a splendid bazaar; she said she would love to go.
　　“and why can’t you？” i asked.
　　while she spoke she turned a silver bracelet round and round her wrist. she could not go, she said, because there would be a retreat that week in her convent. her brother and two other boys were fighting for their caps, and i was alone at the railings. she held one of the spikes, bowing her head towards me. the light from the lamp opposite our door caught the white curve of her neck, lit up her hair that rested there and, falling, lit up the hand upon the railing. it fell over one side of her dress and caught the white border of a petticoat, just visible as she stood at ease.
　　“it’s well for you,” she said.
　　“if i go, ” i said, “i will bring you something.”




第24章 阿拉比詹姆斯·乔伊斯 (2)


　　what innumerable follies laid waste my waking and sleeping thoughts after that evening！ i wished to annihilate the tedious intervening days. i chafed against the work of school. at night in my bedroom and by day in the classroom her image came between me and the page i strove to read. the syllables of the word araby were called to me through the silence in which my soul luxuriated and cast an eastern enchantment over me. i asked for leave to go to the bazaar on saturday night. my aunt was surprised, and hoped it was not some freemason affair. i answered few questions in class. i watched my master’s face pass fromamiability to sternness; he hoped i was not beginning to idle. i could not call my wandering thoughts together. i had hardly any patience with the serious work of life which, now that it stood between me and my desire, seemed to me child’s play, ugly monotonous child’s play.
　　on saturday morning i reminded my uncle that i wished to go to the bazaar in the evening. he was fussing at the hallstand, looking for the hat-brush, and answered me curtly:
　　“yes, boy, i know.”
　　as he was in the hall i could not go into the front parlour and lie at the window. i felt the house in bad humour and walked slowly towards the school. the air was pitilessly raw and already my heart misgave me.
　　when i came home to dinner my uncle had not yet been home. still it was early. i sat staring at the clock for some time and, when its ticking began to irritate me, i left the room. i mounted the staircase and gained the upper part of the house. the high, cold, empty, gloomy rooms liberated me and i went from room to room singing. from the front window i saw my companions playing below in the street. their cries reached me weakened and indistinct and, leaning my forehead against the cool glass, i looked over at the dark house where she lived. i may have stood there for an hour, seeing nothing but the brown-clad figure cast by my imagination, touched discreetly by the lamplight at the curved neck, at the hand upon the railings and at the border below the dress.
　　when i came downstairs again i found mrs mercer sitting at the fire. she was an old, garrulous woman, a pawnbroker’s widow, who collected used stamps for some pious purpose. i had to endure the gossip of the tea-table. the meal was prolonged beyond an hour and still my uncle did not come. mrs mercer stood up to go: she was sorry she couldn’t wait any longer, but it was after eight o’clock and she did not like to be out late, as the night air was bad for her. when she had gone i began to walk up and down the room, clenching my fists. my aunt said:
　　“i’m afraid you may put off your bazaar for this night of our lord.”
　　at nine o’clock i heard my uncle’s latchkey in the hall door. i heard him talking to himself and heard the hallstand rocking when it had received the weight of his overcoat. i could interpret these signs. when he was midway through his dinner i asked him to give me the money to go to the bazaar. he had forgotten.
　　“the people are in bed and after their first sleep now,” he said.
　　i did not smile. my aunt said to him energetically:
　　“can’t you give him the money and let him go？ you’ve kept him late enough as it is.”
　　my uncle said he was very sorry he had forgotten. he said he believed in the old saying: “all work and no play makes jack a dull boy.” he asked me where i was going and, when i told him a second time, he asked me did i know the arab’s farewell to his steed. when i left the kitchen he was about to recite the opening lines of the piece to my aunt.
　　i held a florin tightly in my hand as i strode down buckingham street towards the station. the sight of the streets thronged with buyers and glaring with gas recalled to me the purpose of my journey. i took my seat in a third-class carriage of a deserted train. after an intolerable delay the train moved out of the station slowly. it crept onward among ruinous houses and over the twinkling river. at westland row station a crowd of people pressed to the carriage doors; but the porters moved them back, saying that it was a special train for the bazaar. i remained alone in the bare carriage. in a few minutes the train drew up beside an improvised wooden platform. i passed out on to the road and saw by the lighted dial of a clock that it was ten minutes to ten. in front of me was a large building which displayed the magical name.
　　i could not find any sixpenny entrance and, fearing that the bazaar would be closed, i passed in quickly through a turnstile, handing a shilling to a weary-looking man. i found myself in a big hall girdled at half its height by a gallery. nearly all the stalls were closed and the greater part of the hall was in darkness. i recognized a silence like that which pervades a church after a service. i walked into the centre of the bazaar timidly. a few people were gathered about the stalls which were still open. before a curtain, over which the words cafe  chantant were written in coloured lamps, two men were counting money on a salver. i listened to the fall of the coins.
　　remembering with difficulty why i had come, i went over to one of the stalls and examined porcelain vases and flowered tea-sets. at the door of the stall a young lady was talking and laughing with two young gentlemen. i remarked their english accentsand listened vaguely to their conversation.
　　“o, i never said such a thing！”
　　“o, but you did！”
　　“o, but i didn’t！”
　　“didn’t she say that？”
　　“yes. i heard her.”
　　“o, there’s a... fib！”
　　observing me, the young lady came over and asked me did i wish to buy anything. the tone of her voice was not encouraging; she seemed to have spoken to me out of a sense of duty. i looked humbly at the great jars that stood like eastern guards at either side of the dark entrance to the stall and murmured:
　　“no, thank you.”
  www.7wenxue.com



第25章 阿拉比詹姆斯·乔伊斯 (3)


　　the young lady changed the position of one of the vases and went back to the two young men. they began to talk of the same subject. once or twice the young lady glanced at me over her shoulder.
　　i lingered before her stall, though i knew my stay was useless, to make my interest in her wares seem the more real. then i turned away slowly and walked down the middle of the bazaar. i allowed the two pennies to fall against the six-pence in my pocket. i heard a voice call from one end of the gallery that the light was out. the upper part of the hall was now completely dark.
　　gazing up into the darkness i saw myself as a creature driven and derided by vanity; and my eyes burned with anguish and anger.
　　阿拉比
　　[爱尔兰] 詹姆斯·乔伊斯
　　詹姆斯·乔伊斯（1882-1941），20世纪世界最重要的作家之一，现实主义和象征主义相结合是他文学成就的最大特征。他是一位注重心理分析的小说家，其作品大量运用了意识流的手法。他在语言应用与文体风格上的创新对20世纪的文学有极其深刻的影响，被公认为西方现代文学大师，一位具有真正创造性的天才。代表作有《都柏林人》《尤利西斯》等，本篇是《都柏林人》中的第三篇短篇小说。
　　里士满北街静悄悄的。只有当基督教兄弟学校的男孩们放假时，这条死胡同的沉寂才被打破。有一幢无人居住的两层楼房，远离广场上的其他房子,矗立在胡同口。而其他房子则一副端庄的样子，严肃地彼此凝视着。
　　原来租住在我们家的一个牧师，在客厅后面死去了。由于屋子封闭太久，房间里空气潮湿，且弥漫着一股霉气。厨房后面那个废弃的房间里堆满了废报纸，我在其中发现了几本卷了边、发了潮的平装书：沃尔特·司各特的《修道院院长》《虔诚的教友》，还有《维多契回忆录》。我最喜欢最后一本，因为它的书页是黄色的。房后那座荒芜的花园，中央长着一棵苹果树，还有几棵恣意生长的灌木。在其中一棵下，我找到了牧师留下的锈迹斑斑的自行车打气筒。他曾是位心地善良的牧师，他在遗嘱里，把所有的钱都捐给了慈善机构，只把房里的家具留给了妹妹。
　　冬季，白天渐渐变短，还没来得及吃晚饭，天已经黄昏了。街上的房屋已变得昏暗阴沉。头顶的天空永远是变幻中的紫罗兰色，街灯向着广袤的天空散发出微弱的光芒，冷空气侵袭而来。我们嬉闹着，直到全身发热；我们叫着，喊着，声音回荡在寂静的街道上；我们跑着，闹着，穿过房后黑暗、泥泞的胡同。在那儿我们玩野蛮部落的囚犯拼命在两排人中间跑，躲避杖击的游戏。我们跑到黑暗潮湿的园子的后门，那儿的灰坑散发出刺鼻的臭味，最后跑到臭气熏天而阴暗的马厩。马夫在那里抚弄梳理着马的鬃毛，或是摆弄扣好的马具，发出悦耳的响声。当我们回到街上的时候，厨房里的灯光照射出来，透过窗户，洒满了整条街道。若是看到我的叔叔从街角走来，我们就躲到暗处，看着他走进屋子，诸事平安为止。有时候，曼根的姐姐走到门口的台阶前，叫她的弟弟喝晚茶，我们就从暗处看见她向街的两头眺望。我们会等一会儿，看她是继续待在那里还是进屋去，如果她待在那里，我们就离开藏身之地，乖乖地走上曼根家的台阶。她正在等我们，从半开的门缝里透出的灯光映出她那迷人的身影。在弟弟听从她之前会取笑他，我就站在栏杆旁边看着她，她走动的时候裙子一摆一摆的，柔软的发梢来回甩动。
　　每天早晨，我都躺在前厅的地板上盯着她房间的门。我把百叶窗拉下来，只留不到一英寸的缝，这样别人就不会看到我。当她从房间里出来，走到门前的台阶上时，我的心开始激动起来。我跑到大厅，抓起书，紧紧地跟在她的身后。我的眼睛一直盯着她那棕色的身影，快到我们不得不分开的地方时，我便加快脚步超过她。天天早晨都如此，除了偶尔打个招呼，我从未说过什么，但是她的名字却召唤着我，在我愚蠢的血液中涤荡。
　　即使在最不具备浪漫气息的地方，她的身影也会出现在我的脑海里。周六傍晚，我的婶婶去集市，我得帮她拿着大包小包的东西。我们穿梭在繁华的街道上，在醉鬼和讨价还价的女人中间挤来挤去，其中还夹杂着工人们的咒骂声。成桶的猪肉旁，店铺伙计用他们那尖尖的嗓子不厌其烦地吆喝着，街头艺人用鼻音哼着奥多若万·罗萨的《大家都来吧》的曲子，或者唱着关于我们动乱的祖国的歌谣。这些吵闹声使我对生活产生了发自心底的唯一的感受：我梦想着自己捧着盛满圣餐的杯子，安然地从一群仇敌中间走过。当我做着奇怪的祷告和赞美（而这些我却一点都不懂）时，她的名字常常从我的唇间蹦出来。不知为什么，我的眼中常常满含泪水，而有时心里又会涌起一股狂潮，充溢着我的胸膛。我极少想到将来。我不知道是否会和她讲话，也不知若是讲了话，如何告诉她我对她是那样的仰慕，而这种仰慕又是如此令人困惑。但我的心就如一架竖琴，她的言语、笑容，行为举止如拨动琴弦的手指一般，在我的心底划过。
　　一天夜里，我走进了牧师去世的那个客厅后面。这是一个下雨天的深夜，房间里悄无声息。透过一扇碎了玻璃的窗户，我听到雨滴拍打着地面的声音，雨水像永无止尽的针线一样，连绵不断地坠落在潮湿的地面上。不远处有灯光，有些窗户也透出微弱的光芒。庆幸的是，我几乎什么也看不见，失去了所有的感觉。于是我紧合掌心，以至于双手颤抖，我喃喃自语：哦，爱！哦，爱！如此这般，重复了很多次。
　　她终于跟我说话了，当她刚开始对我讲时，我木讷极了，不知怎么回她的话。她问我，去不去阿拉比啊。我不记得当时是说去还是不去。那是很不错的集市啊，她说道，她想去。
　　“那你怎么不去啊？”我问她。
　　她一边说话，一边不停地转动着手腕上的银手链。她说，她不能去，因为那个星期她要到修道院去静修。她弟弟和另外两个男孩子正在抢帽子，而我一个人扶着栏杆。她的手握着栏杆上的尖头，低着头对着我。房门对面的路灯照到我们这边来，她那白皙的脖颈，垂在脖子里而又落了下来的柔发，握紧栏杆的手都被融进灯光里。灯光落在她裙子的一边，恰好照在衬裙的白色镶边上，她安逸地站在那儿，刚好被我看得清清楚楚。
　　“你能去真幸运啊！”她说。
　　“要是我去的话，”我说，“我给你捎些东西。”
　　那晚后，多少荒唐愚蠢的念头让我日夜不安啊，我渴望那些单调乏味的日子能马上过去，学校里那些功课着实让我恼火。深夜在卧室里，白天在教室里，她的身影总浮现于眼前，我拼命想要读下去的书页里也会闪现她迷人的身段。静默中，我的灵魂感受到了巨大的快感，“阿拉比”，这个词的每个音节时时刻刻呼唤着我，让我像中了东方的魔法一样。我向婶婶请求周六晚上到集市上走走，她很吃惊，说但愿不是干什么秘密帮会的勾当。在课堂上，我几乎回答不上老师的提问，我望着老师，他的脸色从温和变为严厉，他希望我不要虚度光阴。我老是走神，思绪无法集中。我对生活失去了耐心，无法严肃地度过每一天。既然正常的生活把我和我的欲望隔离开来，那么我觉得它就如小孩子的游戏，单调而又丑陋。
　　到了周六的早晨，我提醒叔父，我晚上想去集市。他正在衣帽架上翻弄着，找他的帽子，于是不耐烦地回答我说：
　　“我知道了，孩子。”
　　当他在大厅里时，我是不能去前厅，躺到窗子下的。我觉得房里郁闷无趣，就慢吞吞地往学校走去。路上寒风刺骨，刀割一般，我就想，自己是不是决定错了。
　　我到家吃晚饭时，叔父还没回家。时间还早，我坐在那里，盯了一会儿时钟后，听着时钟滴滴答答的声音，开始烦躁起来，于是我离开了房间。我爬上楼梯，走到房子的上面。那些房间既高又冷，空旷而阴暗，却放松了我的心情，我唱着歌在房间中来回穿梭。从前窗望去，我看到同伴们在下面的街上玩耍。他们的叫喊声既微弱又模糊，我把头靠在冰冷的玻璃上，目光凝视着她住的那座漆黑的屋子。我可能在那里站了一个小时，我的眼里除了想象中的那个身穿棕色衣服的身影外，别无他物。灯光谨慎地摩娑着她那弯弯的脖子，她握在栏杆上的手，还有裙子下的镶边。
　　再下楼时，我发现默瑟太太坐在炉火边。她老了，而且多嘴多舌。她是一个当铺老板的遗孀，曾经很虔诚地收集过一些用过的邮票。我必须忍受茶桌上的闲言碎语，晚饭拖拖拉拉吃了一个多小时，但叔父还是没有回来。默瑟太太起身要走，她很遗憾不能再等了，而且现在已过了八点，她不喜欢在外面待得太晚，因为晚上的空气让她很不舒服。她走了之后，我开始在房间里走来走去，紧握拳头。婶婶说：
　　“我想也许你该推迟去市场的日子，因为今晚是主的礼拜六夜晚。”
　　九点钟，我听到弹簧钥匙开大厅门的声音，是叔父回来了。我听到他正在喃喃自语，他的外套搭到衣帽架发出的撞击声。我很清楚这意味着什么。当他把饭吃到一半时，我请求他给我些钱，好去集市。他已经忘了。
　　“人们现在都上床了，并且睡了一觉醒来了。”他说道。
　　我没有笑。婶婶迫不及待地对他说：
　　“你就不能给他钱让他去吗？其实，他已经等你很长时间了，走到集市也很晚了。”
　　叔父说他很抱歉，因为他全忘了。他很相信那句古老的谚语：“只工作不娱乐，聪明人也会变成傻子。”他问我要去哪里，当我再次告诉他时，他问我是否知道《阿拉伯人告别他的骏马》这首诗。我离开厨房时，他正要背诵这首诗的开头几句给婶婶听。
　　我沿着白金汉街大踏步地往车站走去，手里紧紧地攥一枚佛罗林。街上拥挤的购物者和耀眼的煤气灯唤起了我的记忆，我想起我为什么来这里了。我挤上一列空荡的火车，在三等车厢找了个位置坐了下来。令人无法忍受的是，等了好长一会儿，火车才缓慢地驶出。列车慢慢地驶向前方，途经破旧不堪的房屋，跨过波光荡漾的河流。在韦斯特兰德罗车站，人群如潮水般涌向车厢门口，但是乘务员却把他们往后推，告诉他们这是去集市的专列。空荡荡的车厢里，始终只有我一人。几分钟过后，列车慢慢地停靠在一个临时搭建的木制月台前。我出了车厢，走到大路上，看见时钟亮着灯，时针已指向九点五十分。一幢高大的建筑物矗立在我的面前，展示着那个魔幻般的名字。
　　我找不到六便士的入口，又担心集市马上结束，就迅速地从一个十字转门进去，递给一个面容疲倦的人一个先令。我发现自己走到了一个被走廊卡在半空中的大厅里。几乎所有的摊位都在收拾东西，大厅处于一片昏暗之中。我觉得四周有一种沉默，就像礼拜结束后弥漫在教堂里那种沉默一样。我胆怯地走到集市中央，有几家摊位还没打佯，几个人围在那里。在由彩灯拼出了cafe chantant字样的窗帘前，两个男人正数着托盘上的钱。我听着钱币落到托盘的声音。
　　费了好大劲，我才想起此行的目的。我往一家摊位走去，仔细研究着那些精美的花瓶和镶嵌着花朵的茶具。在一家摊位门前，一位年轻的少妇正与两位年轻的绅士谈笑风生。他们操着英国口音，我模模糊糊地听着他们的谈话。
　　“我从来没有说过！”
　　“啊，但是你确实说过！”
　　“啊，但是我没有说过！”
　　“难道她没说过吗？”
　　“是的，我听她说过！”
　　“哦，你……瞎说！”
　　看到我，这位年轻的小姐走上前来，问我是否要买东西。她含糊不清的语调没有一点积极性，好像和我讲话只是出于自己的义务。在昏暗的摊位入口处，一些大罐子好像东方卫士一样矗立着，我谦恭地凝视着那些大罐子，嘟哝着说：
　　“不，谢谢。”
　　这位年轻的小姐把一个花瓶挪了挪位置，又转向了那两位年轻人。他们又开始谈论原先的话题，年轻的小姐偶尔侧着肩膀瞥我一两眼。
　　尽管待在这里已毫无意义，我还是在她的摊位前逗留着，想让他们明白我真的对花瓶感兴趣。然后我慢慢地转身走开，往集市中间走去。我让两个便士在口袋里撞击着六便士的硬币。我听到走廊的那头传来一个声音：要熄灯了。大厅的上层现在一片漆黑。
　　我抬头凝视着黑暗，发觉自己是受虚荣驱动和愚弄的可怜虫，我的双眼燃烧着痛苦和愤怒。
/



第26章 最后一课阿尔封斯·都德 (1)


　　the last lesson
　　alphonse daudet
　　i started for school very late that morning and was in great dread of a scolding, especially because m. hamel had said that he would question us on participles, and i did not know the first word about them. for a moment i thought of running away and spending the day out of doors. it was so warm, so bright！ the birds were chirping at the edge of the woods; and in the open field back of the sawmill the prussian soldiers were drilling. it was all much more tempting than the rule for participles, but i had the strength to resist, and hurried off to school.
　　when i passed the town hall there was a crowd in front of the bulletin-board. for the last two years all our bad news had come from there—the lost battles, the draft, the orders of the commanding officer—and i thought to myself, without stopping:
　　“what can be the matter now？”
　　then, as i hurried by as fast as i could go, the blacksmith, wachter, who was there, with his apprentice, reading the bulletin, called after me:
　　“don’t go so fast, bub; you’ll get to your school in plenty of time！”
　　i thought he was making fun of me, and reached m. hamel’s little garden all out of breath.
　　usually, when school began, there was a great bustle, which could be heard out in the street, the opening and closing of desks, lessons repeated in unison, very loud, with our hands over our ears to understand better, and the teacher’s great ruler rapping on the table.“a little more quite！” but now it was all so still！ i had counted on the commotion to get to my desk without being seen; but, of course, that day everything had to be as quiet as sunday morning. through the window i saw my classmates, already in their places, and m. hamel walking up and down with his terrible iron ruler under his arm. i had to open the door and go in before everybody. you can imagine how i blushed and how frightened i was.
　　but nothing happened. m. hamel saw me and said very kindly：
　　“go to your place quickly, little franz. we were beginning without you.”
　　i jumped over the bench and sat down at my desk. not till then, when i had got a little over my fright, did i see that our teacher had on his beautiful green coat, his frilled shirt, and the little black silk cap, all embroidered, that he never wore except on inspection and prize days. besides, the whole school seemed so strange and solemn. but the thing that surprised me most was to see, on the back benches that were always empty, the village people sitting quietly like ourselves; old hauser, with his three-cornered hat, the former mayor, the former postmaster, and several others besides. everybody looked sad; and hauser had brought an old primer, thumbed at the edges, and he held it open on his knees with his great spectacles lying across the pages.
　　while i was wondering about it all, m. hamel mounted his chair, and, in the same grave and gentle tone which he had used to me, said：
　　“my children, this is the last lesson i shall give you. the order has come from berlin to teach only german in the schools of alsace and lorraine. the new master comes tomorrow. this is your last french lesson. i want you to be very attentive.”
　　what a thunderclap these words were to me！
　　oh, the wretches; that was what they had put up at the townhall！
　　my last french lesson！ why, i hardly knew how to write！ i should never learn any more！ i must stop there, then！ oh, how sorry i was for not learning my lessons, for seeking birds’ eggs, or going sliding on the saar！ my books, that had seemed such a nuisance a while ago, so heavy to carry, my grammar, and my history of the saints, were old friends now that i couldn’t give up. and m. hamel, too; the idea that he was going away, that i should never see him again, made me forget all about his ruler and how cranky he was.




第27章 最后一课阿尔封斯·都德 (2)


　　poor man！ it was in honor of this last lesson that he had put on his fine sunday clothes, and now i understood why the old men of the village were sitting there in the back of the room. it was because they were sorry, too, that they had not gone to school more. it was their way of thanking our master for his forty years of faithful service and of showing their respect for the country that was theirs no more.
　　while i was thinking of all this, i heard my name called. it was my turn to recite. what would i not have given to be able to say that dreadful rule for the participle all through, very loud and clear, and without one mistake？ but i got mixed up on the first words and stood there, holding on to my desk, my heart beating, and not daring to look up. i heard m. hamel say to me：
　　“i won’t scold you, little franz; you must feel bad enough. see how it is！ every day we have said to ourselves: pshaw！ i’ve plenty of time. i’ll learn it tomorrow.’ and now you see where we’ve come out. ah, that’s the great trouble with alsace; she puts off learning till tomorrow. now those fellows out there will have the right to say to you: ’how is it; you pretend to be frenchmen, and yet you can neither speak nor write your own language？’ but you are not the worst, poor little franz. we’ve all a great deal to reproach ourselves with.
　　“your parents were not anxious enough to have you learn. they preferred to put you to work on a farm or at the mills, so as to have a little more money. and i？ i’ve been to blame also. have i not often sent you to water my flowers instead of learning your lessons？ and when i wanted to go fishing, did i not just give you a holiday？”
　　then, from one thing to another, m. hamel went on to talk of the french language, saying that it was the most beautiful language in the world—the clearest, the most logical; that we must guard it among us and never forget it, because when a people are enslaved, as long as they hold fast to their language it is as if they had the key to their prison. then he opened a grammar and read us our lesson. i was amazed to see how well i understood it. all he said seemed so easy, so easy！ i think, too, that i had never listened so carefully, and that he had never explained everything with so much patience. it seemed almost as if the poor man wanted to give us all he knew before going away, and to put it all into our heads at one stroke.
　　after the grammar, we had a lesson in writing. that day m. hamel had new copies for us, written in a beautiful round hand: france, alsace, france, alsace. they looked like little flags floating everywhere in the schoolroom, hung fromthe rod at the top of our desks. you ought to have seen how every one set to work, and how quiet it was！ the only sound was the scratching of the pens over the paper. once some beetles flew in; but nobody paid any attention to them, not even the littlest ones, who worked right on tracing their fishhooks, as if that was french, too. on the roof the pigeons cooed very low, and i thought to myself：
　　“will they make them sing in german, even the pigeons？”
　　whenever i looked up from my writing i saw m. hamel sitting motionless in his chair and gazing first at one thing, then at another, as if he wanted to fix in his mind just how everything looked in that little schoolroom. fancy！ for forty years he had been there in the same place, with his garden outside the window and his class in front of him, just like that. only the desks and benches had been worn smooth; the walnut-trees in the garden were taller, and the hopvine that he had planted himself twined about the windows to the roof. how it must have broken his heart to leave it all, poor man; to hear his sister moving about in the room above, packing their trunks！ for they must leave the country next day.
　　but he had the courage to hear every lesson to the very last. after the writing, we had a lesson in history, and then the babies chanted their ba, be bi, bo, bu. down there at the back of the room old hauser had put on his spectacles and, holding his primer in both hands, spelled the letters with them. you could see that he, too, was crying; his voice trembled with emotion, and it was so funny to hear him that we all wanted to laugh and cry. ah, how well i remember it, that last lesson！




第28章 最后一课阿尔封斯·都德 (3)


　　all at once the church-clock struck twelve. then the angelus. at the same moment the trumpets of the prussians, returning from drill, sounded under our windows. m. hamel stood up, very pale, in his chair. i never saw him look so tall.
　　“my friends,” said he, “i—i—” but something choked him. he could not go on.
　　then he turned to the blackboard, took a piece of chalk, and, bearing on with all his might, he wrote as large as he could:
　　“vive la france！”
　　then he stopped and leaned his head against the wall, and, without a word, he made a gesture to us with his hand:
　　“school is dismissed—you may go.”
　　最后一课
　　[法国] 阿尔封斯·都德
　　阿尔封斯·都德（1840-1897），19世纪法国现实主义作家。生于法国南方一个破落的丝绸商人家庭。15岁起就独自谋生，后来到巴黎，从事文艺创作，过着清苦的文人生活。1870年，普法战争爆发，都德应征入伍。1897年卒于巴黎。都德一生写过近百篇短篇小说，其中大多数作品以普法战争为背景，讴歌了法国人民的爱国情怀，主要作品有长篇小说《小东西》《达拉斯贡城的戴达伦》《不朽者》，短篇小说《最后一课》《柏林之围》，散文集《磨坊书简》等。
　　那天早上，我很晚才去上学，心里非常害怕受到责骂，因为阿麦尔先生说过，他要考我们分词规则，而我连开头字母都不会写。这时，我突然冒出了逃学去田野里玩的念头。这是个晴朗、艳阳高照的日子，我听见鸟儿在小树林边鸣叫，锯木厂后面的里贝尔草地上又传来普鲁士兵的操练声。对于我来说，这一切都比分词规则更有诱惑力，不过我还是抑制住了诱惑，快步往学校跑去。
　　从村政府门前经过时，我看见许多人站在小布告栏前。这两年，所有的坏消息，比如打败仗，征兵征物，还有普鲁士军队司令部发布的命令等，都是从那里传来的。我边跑边想：
　　“又发生什么事了？”
　　当我跑过广场时，瓦克特尔铁匠和他的徒弟正在布告栏前看布告，看到我喊道：
　　“小家伙，不要着急嘛，再晚你也不会迟到的！”
　　开什么玩笑，我生气极了，一口气跑到阿麦尔先生的教室。
　　要是往常，上课前教室里总是乱哄哄的，人声嘈杂。课桌开开关关的声音，同学们捂住耳朵背诵课文的声音，甚至在大街上都能听得到。阿麦尔先生用大戒尺敲着课桌，叫道：“安静，安静！”这样，我就可以在嘈杂声的掩护下，趁机溜到座位上。可是，今天却别于往日，教室里静悄悄的，如同星期天的早晨。从开着的窗户望去，同学们都整整齐齐地坐在自己的位置上，阿麦尔先生的掖下夹着那把可怕的铁戒尺，在教室里来回走动。我不得不推开门，走进安静的教室。可想而知，我当时是多么地尴尬与胆怯！
　　可是什么也没有发生。阿麦尔先生只是看了看我，异常温和地说道：
　　“快点回到座位上去吧，小弗朗茨，要不是你，我们早就上课了！”
　　我跨过凳子，在座位上坐了下来。直到我稳下心来听课，才看到老师今天穿着他那件帅气的绿色礼服，领口打着精致的领结，头上戴着那顶刺绣黑绸小圆帽，他只有在上级派人来学校视察或学校颁奖时才穿这身衣服的。此时，教室异常地庄严肃穆。可是最令我吃惊的是教室后面那些通常空着的凳子上，此时坐满了镇子上的人。和我们一样，他们也都默不作声，有头戴三角帽的奥泽尔老人、前任镇长、以前的邮递员，还有其他的人都在那里。他们的脸上都带着悲伤，奥泽尔老人的膝盖上还摊了本边角已破损的旧识字课本，那是他随身带来的，他那副大眼镜就放在课本边上。
　　我正觉得奇怪，这时阿麦尔先生在椅子上坐了下来，继续用那温和而又庄重的声音说道：
　　“孩子们，这是我最后一次给你们上课了。柏林下命令，在阿尔萨斯和洛林的学校只能教德语……新老师明天就来了。今天是你们的最后一节法语课了，所以请你们专心听我讲课。”
　　我立刻惊呆了！
　　啊，这些坏蛋，他们在镇政府布告栏贴的就是这个消息。
　　我的最后一节法语课！可我还几乎不会写呢！我再也学不到法语了！我的法语也到此为止了！我是多么懊悔逝去的时光啊！懊悔自己以前为了掏鸟窝，去萨尔河溜冰而逃课！几分钟前，我还觉得我的那些书，法语课本，那神圣的历史课本，是那样令我厌烦，但顷刻之间，他们已是我的老朋友，令我不忍与他们诀别。还有阿麦尔先生，想到他马上要离去，我再也不能与他相见，我便忘记了他那把戒尺和他的暴戾。
　　不幸的人啊！为了纪念最后一节课，他穿上了那帅气的节日盛装。直到现在，我才明白为什么教室的后面坐满了镇子上的老人。那是因为，他们也为自己以后不能到学校学习而感到懊悔。他们以自己的方式来表达对先生四十年优秀教学的感激，和对那已被他国掠去的国土的敬仰。
　　正想着，突然听到先生在叫我的名字，该我背分词规则了。倘若我能声音洪亮，准确而又清晰地把分词规则从头背到尾，我情愿付出一切代价。可是，我连开始的那些词都还没弄懂。我站在那儿，用手支着桌子，心怦怦直跳，头低着，不敢抬起。这时，我听到阿麦尔先生说道：
　　“不责备你了，小弗朗茨，你受到的惩罚已经够了。事实就是如此，每天我们都对自己说：我有很多时间，明天再学吧。’现在你们知道发生的事情了吧。这就是阿尔萨斯人最大的不幸：明天再学习。现在，那些人有权利说：怎么回事啊，你们扮做法国人，却不会说或者写自己的语言？’不幸的弗朗茨，这些并不是你的责任，我们每个人都有很多需要自责的地方。
　　“你们的父母并未尽力让你们努力读书。他们宁愿打发你们到农场或者工厂里做工，只是为了多挣几个钱。我呢，也应该自责，我不也常常打发你们到我的花园里浇水而不让你们学习吗？当我想去钓鱼时，不也让你们放假吗？”
　　阿麦尔先生谈起了以前的又一件事。而后开始上法语课，他说，法语是世界上最美的语言——最精确、最具逻辑性的语言；我们都应永远掌握它、记住它。因为，当一个民族亡国时，只要自己的语言永存，就犹如手握打开监狱之门的钥匙。然后，他打开一本语法书，读起了课文。我吃惊地发现，我竟然能这么透彻地理解它。他所说的看起来都那么简单易懂！我还觉得我从未这么认真地听过讲，而他也从未如此耐心地给我们讲过课。这个不幸的人仿佛要在临走前把他所知道的一切都教给我们，把所有的知识都灌输到我们脑子里。
　　讲完了语法，我们开始上写字课。那天，阿麦尔先生准备了许多崭新的字卡样，上面有美丽的圆体字：法兰西，阿尔萨斯，法兰西，阿尔萨斯。这些字帖卡犹如教室里飘扬的小旗子，悬挂在课桌的金属杆上。可以看到，每个人都那样聚精会神，教室里是那样悄无声息，只听见笔尖划过白纸的沙沙声。偶尔有几只金龟子跑到了教室，但丝毫没有引起我们的注意，甚至连最小的同学也在专心地练直杠笔划，似乎那些也是法语。屋顶上鸽子在咕咕地低吟着，我边听边想：
　　“他们该不会迫使这些鸽子也唱德语歌吧？”
　　我的眼睛不时地从书本移向阿麦尔先生，只见他一动不动地坐在椅子上，注视着教室里的一切，仿佛要把这个小教室中的所有都装进眼睛里带走。可想而知！四十年来，他始终如一地待在这里，固守着对面的院子和一成不变的教室。唯独教室的凳子和课桌被学生磨得光滑了；花园里的核桃树也长高了，那棵啤酒花，是他亲自种下的，如今也都爬满了窗户，爬到了屋顶。听到自己的妹妹在楼上卧室里来回走动着收拾行李，想到自己就要与眼前的一切诀别，这个不幸的人是多么伤心啊！因为明天他们不得不离开了。
　　但是他还是鼓起勇气把课上完，写作课完后是历史课。接着，我们唱起了ba,be,bi,bo,bu。坐在教室后面的奥泽尔老人戴上了眼镜，双手捧着识字课本，随我们拼读起来。看得出，他也在哭，声音因激动而颤抖。那样子看起来滑稽，让人既想笑又想哭。啊，我的最后一课，我将永远记住你！
　　突然，教堂的钟敲了12下，接着是祈祷的钟声。这时，普鲁士军队也操练完了，正在回营，他们的号声回响在我们的窗下。阿麦尔先生从椅子上起身，面色苍白,我从未见过他如此高大。
　　“朋友们，”他说道，“我——我——”但似乎有东西卡住了他的喉咙。他说不下去了。
　　他转过身，拿起一支粉笔，用尽全身的力气，在黑板上写了几个大字：
　　“法兰西万岁！”
　　然后他停了下来，头倚着墙壁，没说一句话，只是打了一个手势：
　　“放学了——你们走吧。”
www.7wenxue.com.  



第29章 一小时的故事凯特·肖邦


　　the story of an hour
　　kate choplin
　　they knew that louise mallard had a weak heart.so they broke the bad news softly. her husband, brently, was dead.
　　“there was a train accident, louise,” said her sister josephine.  richards brought the news, but josephine told the story. she spoke in broken sentences.
　　“richards... was at the newspaper office. news of the accident came.  louise...louise, brently’s name was on the list. brently was killed, louise.”
　　louise did not hear the story coldly, as some women would. she could not close her mind or her heart to the news. like a sudden storm, her tears broke out. she cried loudly in her sister’s arms. then, just as suddenly, the tears stopped. she went to her room alone. she wanted no one with her.
　　in front of the window stood an empty chair. she sat down and looked out the window. she was tired after her tears. her body felt cold, her mind and heart were empty.
　　outside her window she could see the trees. the air smelled like spring rain. she could hear someone singing far away. birds sang near the house.  blue sky showed between the clouds. she rested.
　　she sat quietly, but a few weak tears still fell. she had a young, strong face. but now her eyes showed nothing. she looked out the window at the blue sky. she was not thinking, or seeing. she was waiting.
　　there was something coming to her.  she was waiting for it with fear. what was it？  she did not know; she could not give it a name.  but she felt it coming out from the sky. it reached her through the sound, the smell, the color of the air.
　　slowly she became excited. her breath came fast, her heart beat faster. she began to see this thing. it wanted to find her and take her. she tried to fight against it. but she could not. her mind was as weak as her two small white hands. then she stopped fighting against it. a little word broke from her lips.
　　“free,” she said, “free, free, free！” the emptiness and fear left her. her eyes showed her excitement. her heart beat fast, and the blood warmed her body. a sudden feeling of joy excited her.
　　she did not stop to ask if her joy was wrong. she saw her freedom clearly. she could not stop to think of smaller things.
　　she knew the tears would come again when she saw her husband’s body. the kind hands, now dead and still. the loving face, now still and gray. but she looked into the future.  she saw many long years to come that would belong to her alone. and now she opened her arms to those years in welcome.
　　there would be no one else to live for during hose years. she would live for herself alone. there would be no strong mind above hers. men and women always believe they can tell others what to do and how to think. suddenly louise understood hat this was wrong.  she could break away and be free of it.
　　and yet, she loved him—sometimes. often she did not. what did love mean now？ now she understood that freedom is stronger than love.
　　“free！ body and mind free！”she said again.
　　her sister josephine was waiting outside the door.
　　“please open the door,” josephine cried, “you will make yourself sick. what are you doing there, louise？ please, please, let me in！”
　　“go away. i am not sick.” no, she was drinking in life through that open window.
　　she thought joyfully of all those days before her. spring days, summer days. all kinds of days that would be her own. she began to hope life would be long. and just yesterday, life seemed so long！
　　after a while she got up and opened the door.
　　her eyes were bright, her cheeks were red. she didn’t know how strong and well she looked—so full of joy. they went downstairs, where richards was waiting.
　　a man was opening the door. it was brenfiy.he was dirty, and tired.  he carried a suitcase and an umbrella.  he was not killed in the train accident. he didn’t even know there was an accident. he was surprised at josephine’s sudden cry.  he didn’t understand why richards moved suddenly between them, to hide louise from her husband.
　　but richard was too late.
　　when the doctors came, they said it was her weak bad heart. they said she died of joy—of joy that kills.
　　一小时的故事
　　[美国] 凯特·肖邦
　　凯特·肖邦（1851-1904），美国作家，生于密苏里州的圣路易斯。她从1882年起，开始从事写作，其作品包括诗歌、小说、文学评论。她快四十岁时出版了第一本小说《故障》，代表作有《阿卡迪一夜》《觉醒》等。她的后期作品，如本文《一小时的故事》，题材开始侧重于女性对独立和自由的渴望。
　　他们都知道路易丝·马拉德的心脏不好，所以尽量语气委婉地把这个不幸的消息告诉她。她的丈夫，布伦特里，死了。
　　“路易丝，刚才有列火车出事故了。”姐姐约瑟芬说道。理查兹带来了这个不幸的消息，但还得约瑟芬告诉她，只是她的话语不那么连贯。
　　“理查兹……在报社工作，有消息说出车祸了。路易丝……路易丝，遇难者的名单里有布伦特里的名字。布伦特里……死了，路易丝。”
　　听说丈夫死了，路易丝表现得不像其他女人那样冷静。面对悲伤，心中的积郁自然无法掩饰，如同暴雨突袭，泪水夺眶而出。她倒在姐姐怀里号啕大哭起来。然后，又突然地雨过天晴，她独自回到房间，要单独待会儿。
　　窗前摆着一把椅子，她坐下来，望着窗外。痛哭过后，她累极了，全身冰凉，神经麻木。
　　窗外的绿树，映入她的眼帘。空气如春雨般清新，远处的歌声飘至耳畔。房子周围，鸟儿轻吟，白云映着蓝天，她安静下来。
　　她静静地坐着，眼里仍有几滴软弱的泪落下。她年轻而又坚强，但此时，她的眼睛毫无神采。她望着蓝天，万念俱灰，只是静静地等待着。
　　有东西正靠近她，她恐惧地等待着，是什么呢？无从知晓，也无以言说。但她似乎觉得它正从空中走来，她觉察到它的声音、气味，还有空气的颜色，这使她觉得它正向她靠近。
　　她慢慢地兴奋起来，呼吸加快、心跳加速。渐渐地，她看清了。它要找到她，并带走她。她挣扎着，要摆脱它，但她不能。她意念薄弱，如同她那双苍白无力的小手一样。于是，她停止了挣扎，一个简短的词语夺口而出。
　　“自由，”她说,“自由，自由，自由！”空虚和恐惧全无，她神色激动、心跳加快、血压上升。突如其来的愉悦使她异常兴奋。
　　她没有静下心来自问这快乐究竟是对还是错，她清晰地看到了自由之国。她无法停下来去思考那些更为琐碎的事情。
　　她知道，当看到丈夫遗体时，她会再次流泪。那双手，曾经是那样温柔，如今已变得冰冷而僵硬；那张脸，曾经满含深情，如今已变得呆板灰暗。但她看到了未来，她看到未来的岁月将是她一人的。现在，她要敞开胸怀，迎接未来。
　　以后的岁月里，她活着不再为他人，而为自己，再也不会有人把意志强加于她。夫妻双方总以为能彼此告诉对方该做什么，该如何思考。路易丝忽然明白了，这只是自己的想法，而且是错上加错。她可以摆脱它，再也不受控于它。
　　但是，至少，她爱他——只是有时。但大部分时间里，她并不爱他。爱究竟是什么呢？现在她明白，自由比爱更伟大。
　　“自由，精神上和肉体上的自由！”她再次说道。
　　这时，姐姐约瑟芬在房间门口等着。
　　“开门，”约瑟芬喊道，“你会把自己折腾出病的。路易丝，你想干什么？求求你，给我开门！”
　　“走开，我没病。”是的，此时，她正透过那扇敞开的窗户，深吸着生命之气。
　　她畅想着未来的日子，内心无比快乐。春花，秋月……所有的日子都将是自己的了。她开始盼望生命变长，而昨天，生命似乎还是那样悠长。
　　过了一会儿，她起身打开房门。只见她目光炯炯有神，面颊红润。至于自己看起来是如何坚定有力，神采飞扬——快乐充溢着她，她不知道。她和约瑟芬走下楼，理查兹正在楼下等她们。
　　一个男人打开了门，是布伦特里。他手拿手提箱和雨伞，一副风尘仆仆，筋疲力尽的样子。他没有在车祸中遇难，甚至，他根本不知道有一列火车出事了。约瑟芬突然大叫起来，这让他感到很意外。他更不明白的是，理查兹为什么会迅速地把他和路易丝隔开，不让她看到自己。
　　然而，太晚了。
　　医生们来了，他们说路易丝死于极其衰弱的心脏，死因是兴奋过度。
wwＷ．lzuｏwen.com  



第30章 存根簿彼得罗·德·阿拉尔贡 (1)


　　the stub-book
　　pedro de alarcon
　　old buscabeata’s back began to curve during the period of which i am going to tell, and the reason was that he was sixty years old, forty of which had been spent working a piece of ground on the banks of the river costilla. that year he had cultivated on his farm a crop of enormous pumpkins, and these pumpkins had attained an orange color both inside and out, which showed that it was now the month of june. buscabeatas knew each one of them perfectly by its form, its state of ripeness, and even by its name, especially the forty which were fattest and richest in colour. he spent all his days gazing at them tenderly, and sadly exclaiming, “soon we shall have to part！”
　　one afternoon he decided on the sacrifice. he pointed to the ripest of his beloved pumpkins, which had cost him so much effort, and said the terrible words, “tomorrow i will cut these forty and take them to the cadiz market. happy is the man who ill eat them！”  and he walked back to the house with slow steps, and spent the night with the agony of a father who is going to marry off his daughter on the following day. “my poor dear pumpkins！” he sighed again and again,  unable to fall asleep. but then he thought, “what else can i do but sell them？ i cultivated them for that purpose.  at least i will receive fifteen duros for them.”
　　imagine then his extreme astonishment, fury and desperation when, going the following morning to the farm, he discovered that he had been robbed during the night of his forty pumpkins. to save time i will merely say that he was filled with tragic fury and that he repeated again and again the terrible words, “oh, if i catch you, if i catch you！”
　　then he began to reflect, coldly, and he decided that his beloved pumpkins couldnot be in rota, his native village. it would be impossible to put them on sale there because they would be recognized. besides, pumpkins fetched a very low price there.
　　“they are in cadiz！” he decided after much thought. “that rascal, the robber, robbed me last night at nine or ten o’clock and escaped with them at midnight in the cargo boat. i will take the boat this very morning for cadiz, and i will be very much surprised if i do not catch the robber and recover the daughters of my labour.” so saying, he yet remained about twenty minutes near the scene of the disaster as if counting the missing pumpkins or planning terrible punishments for the robber, until it was eight o’clock and he left in the direction of the boat.
　　it was almost ready to sail. it leaves for cadiz every morning at nine o’clock, carrying passengers, just as the cargo boat leaves every night at midnight carrying fruit and vegetables.
　　that morning at half past ten buscabeatas paused in front of a vegetable stall in the cadiz market-place, and said to a bored policeman who was standing by. “those are my pumpkins. arrest that man！” and he pointed to the merchant.
　　“arrest me！”  exclaimed the merchant, surprised and furious. “those pumpkins are mine. i bought them...”
　　“you’ll be able to tell that to the judge,” answered buscabeatas.
　　“i won’t.”
　　“you will.”
　　“you’re a rascal.”
　　“you’re a thief.”
　　“you should speak with more politeness. men should not talk to each other in this fashion,” the policeman said with extreme calm, hitting each of them in the chest. meanwhile a crowd had collected, and it was not long before there appeared the police inspector of the public market, the inspector of food.
　　the policeman told this great man what was happening. he questioned the merchant.
　　“from whom did you buy these pumpkins？” the inspector asked importantly.
　　“from fulano, the old man from rota,” the merchant replied.
　　“that would be the man！” cried buscabeatas. “that’s the fellow i suspected！ his farm is poor,and when it produces little, he begins to rob his neighbours.”
　　“but if we admit that you were robbed last night of forty pumpkins,” said the inspector, “how can we prove that these and no others, are yours？”
　　“why？” replied buscabeatas. “because i know them as well as you know your daughters,  if you have any, don’t you see that i have raised them？ look here！ this one is called ’the round one’, that one is ’the fat fellow’, this one is ’the red one’,that is ’manuela’ because she resembles my youngest daughter.”and the poor old man began to cry bitterly.
　　“all this is very good,” answered the inspector. “but the law does not rest satisfied with the fact you recognize your pumpkins. it is necessary that authority should be convinced that the thing already existed and that you should identify it with absolute proofs. senores, you needn’t smile. i am a lawyer. ”
　　“well, you will soon see the proofs that the pumpkins came from my farm; and you will see them without moving from this place.”
　　buscabeatas’s words astonished the spectators, but he dropped on the ground a package which he had been carrying in his hand. then he knelt down and calmly began to untie the knots in the handkerchief which was round the package.
www.7wenxue.com下 ?^书? 网



第31章 存根簿彼得罗·德·阿拉尔贡 (2)


　　“what is he going to take out？” everybody asked with astonishment. at the same time another curious spectator joined the crowd, and seeing him, the merchant exclaimed, “i am glad you are here, fulano！ this man says that these pumpkins, which you sold me last night, were stolen. you can explain...”
　　the newcomer turned yellow and tried to escape. but he was prevented, and in addition the inspector suggested that he should remain. “i grew these pumpkins on my farm,” he said, “and no one can prove the contrary.”
　　“now you will see,” said buscabeatas, opening the handkerchief. he scattered on the ground a quantity of pumpkin stalks, still green and fresh. then, sitting on his feet and half dead with laughter, he said, “gentlemen, have you ever paid taxes？ if so, have you seen that green book which the tax-collector carries？ receipts are cut from it, and they leave a stub by which it can be proved whether a receipt is false or not.”
　　“what you are talking about is the stub-book,” said the inspector gravely.
　　“that is what i am carrying with me; it is the stub-book of my garden. these are the stalks that were attached to my pumpkins before they were stolen from me. and if you do not believe me, look at them. this stalk belonged to this pumpkin. nobody can doubt it. this other one, as you can easily see, belonged to this one. this one, which is wider, must belong to this other one. exactly！ and this one...and that one！”
　　as he said these words, he fitted a stalk to the hollow remaining in the pumpkin when it was plucked, and with astonishment the spectators saw that the stalk exactly fitted the shape of the hole. then they all, including the policemen and the inspector himself, bent down low and began to assist buscabeatas in this strange proof, all saying with childish pleasure, “yes, yes！ it is certainly so！ this one belongs here！ do you see？”
　　the old farmer’s eyes filled with tears of happiness, and the policemen showed themselves ready to take the robber off to prison.
　　it is unnecessary to say that this pleasure was granted them, and that fulano was obliged to return to the merchant the fifteen duros he had received.
　　buscabeatas returned to rota with deep satisfaction, but he kept saying on the way, “how beautiful they looked in the market-place！ i should have brought back manuela, so that i might eat her tonight and keep the seeds.”
　　存根簿
　　[西班牙] 彼得罗· 德· 阿拉尔贡
　　彼得罗·德·阿拉尔贡（1838-1891），出生在西班牙的安达卢西亚，那里曾出过许多知名的西班牙作家。阿拉尔贡早年学习法律，后投笔从戎，立下战功，被授予圣菲尔南多十字勋章。之后，他又开始了写作生涯，曾经写过剧本、小说和诗歌，其作品备受人们喜爱。
　　我要说的这个老布斯卡伯阿塔斯，后背已经有些驼了，他已经年届六旬，整整四十年都在自家的科斯蒂拉河畔的土地上辛苦劳作。那年，他在地里种了很多大南瓜，这些瓜从瓤到皮儿里里外外都泛着金灿灿的光，似乎在告诉人们，现在已是六月份了。布斯卡伯阿塔斯对于每只南瓜的形状、长势、甚至芳名都了如指掌，他尤其喜爱那四十只长得最饱满、颜色最润泽的南瓜。每天，他都用慈爱的目光凝视着这些南瓜，为它们惋惜：“要不了多久，我们就得分开了！”
　　终于，一天下午，他决心和它们说再见了。他指着那些精心栽培的、熟透了的宝贝，心痛地说：“明天我要把你们摘下来拉到加迪斯市场上去了，谁吃到你们，谁就掉进了蜜窝里！”然后，他就晃悠悠地回家了。当晚，他彻夜未眠，就好像女儿待嫁的前夜，做父亲的心如刀割。他不时叹息道：“可怜的宝贝啊！”但是转念一想，“除了卖掉它们，我还能怎么办呢？种不就是为了卖吗？至少，我还能拿到十五个银币啊。”
　　因此，不难想象，第二天早上，当他来到地里，发现有人夜里洗劫了那四十只南瓜时，他是多么惊讶、愤怒和绝望！为节省时间，我长话短说，当时他极度恼怒，不停地重复着那些可怕的字眼：“啊，要是叫我抓到你，要是叫我抓到你！”
　　然后，他静下心来，再三思考，最终认定：小偷已经把可爱的宝贝们运出罗达村了，因为他是不可能在这儿出售的，大家都会认出来，而且在这儿卖也不划算啊。
　　“它们在加迪斯！”反复寻思，他确定，“那个混蛋、强盗，肯定是在昨晚九点或者十点钟时抢走了我的宝贝，然后半夜装上货船，偷运走了。我今天早晨一定要坐船去趟加迪斯，我要抓到强盗，把我苦苦拉扯大的女儿们迎回家。”虽然他嘴里这么念叨着，但还是在那片被洗劫过的南瓜地周围转悠了大约二十多分钟，似乎在计算小偷洗劫了多少只南瓜，又好像是在琢磨怎么严惩那个强盗。直到八点钟，他才往码头走去。
　　船已经快开了。每晚午夜时分，货船会满载着水果和蔬菜出发，客船也是如此，每天上午九点钟开往加迪斯。
　　当天上午十点半，在加迪斯市场里，布斯卡伯阿塔斯走到一个蔬菜摊前，停了下来。这时旁边正好站着一个警察，正四处张望，布斯卡伯阿塔斯指着一个商贩喊道：“那些是我的南瓜，抓住他！”。
　　“抓我！”商贩又惊又气地叫道，“那些南瓜是我的。我买的……”
　　“把这些鬼话讲给法官吧。”布斯卡伯阿塔斯答道。
　　“妄想！”
　　“你会的。”
　　“你是个流氓。”
　　“你是个贼。”
　　“你们两个是男人吗？怎么能这样讲话，说话客气点！”警察极为镇静地说道，并朝他们各自的胸膛擂了一拳。这时，周围已经涌了一大堆人。过了不久，公共市场的督察——食品督察也到了现场。
　　警察向这位大人物汇报了事情的经过。于是，督察开始审问商贩。
　　“你是从哪里采购的南瓜？”督察神气十足地问他。
　　“罗达村的富拉诺老人那里。”商贩答道。
　　“没错，是那个家伙，”布斯卡伯阿塔斯叫道，“我就觉得他鬼鬼祟祟的！他们家的地差得要命，收成也跟不上，他就开始抢邻居家的！”
　　“但是，即使我们可以确证有人昨晚偷了你四十个南瓜，”督察说，“那么你怎么能证明这些南瓜是你的，而非别人的呢？”
　　“为什么？”布斯卡伯阿塔斯答道，“我认识这些南瓜就像您认识您的女儿一样，如果您有的话。您不知道是我把他们拉扯大的吗？您看这个！是我的圆家伙’，那是我的胖妞’，这是我的红孩儿’，那是曼奴拉’，因为她和我的小女儿简直是亲生姐妹。”可怜的老汉顿时放声大哭。
　　“的确有点意思，”督察回答，“但是，法律上还不能单凭你的一面之辞，就确定那些是你的南瓜。你必须让警察厅确信已发生的事实，还有，你必须出示可以证明此事的证据。大家不要笑，我可是个地道的律师。”
　　“没问题，我马上拿出证据，证明这些南瓜是在我的地里长出来的。你们站着别动，马上就能看到。”
　　周围的人听了布斯卡伯阿塔斯的话都惊讶地张大了嘴，而后看到他把刚才拿在手上的小包裹放到了地上，蹲下来，不慌不忙地将系在包裹上的手帕结解开。
　　“他要拿出什么东西来？”大家都感到很诧异。这时，又有个好奇之人挤到了人群里，商贩看到他便大声叫道：“富拉诺！你来得太及时了，这个家伙硬说你昨天晚上卖给我的南瓜是偷他的，你向他解释一下……”
　　刚挤进来的那人顿时变了脸，想溜走，但为时已晚，督察也要求他留下来。“这南瓜是我自己家地里产的，”他说，“没有人能拿出证据说这是他的。”
　　“好，我让你瞧瞧，”布斯卡伯阿塔斯边说边解开了手帕，那鲜嫩的南瓜蒂撒到了地上。然后他蹲在地上，嘴里发出阵阵大笑：“先生们，你们都交过税吧？如果那样，你们肯定看过收税员手里拿的绿册子，收据就是从那上面剪下来的，然后他们把存根留下，用来证明收据的真伪。”
　　“你说的那叫存根簿。” 督察严肃地说。
　　“我带来的就是那东西——我菜园的存根簿。小偷偷我的南瓜之前，它们和南瓜是连着的。要是不信我说的，瞧瞧这些南瓜蒂吧。这个瓜蒂是这个南瓜的，压根儿没有人敢怀疑！看看那个，很明显嘛，是这个南瓜的。这个宽点儿的，肯定是那个的，千真万确！这个……还有那个！”
　　说着，他把一个瓜蒂放在了南瓜被摘下时留下的坑眼上。令人惊奇的是，瓜蒂和坑眼正好吻合。于是，人们，包括警察和督察，都蹲下身来，帮着布斯卡伯阿塔斯用这种奇特的方法来验证。大家都孩童般地欢呼道：“真的是这样，真的！的的确确！您看，这个应该是这只瓜的！”
　　老农夫的眼里溢出了欣喜的泪水，警察表示马上抓捕偷瓜贼。
　　毫无疑问，皆大欢喜。富拉诺不得不把他收下的十五个银币还给了商贩。
　　布斯卡伯阿塔斯得意洋洋地回到了罗达村，还一路上嘟噜着：“它们在市场上看起来多好看呐！要是把曼努拉带回来就好了，那样，今晚我就可以吃了它，再把瓜籽留下来。”
 下 ?^书? 网



第32章 一桶白葡萄酒埃德加·爱伦·坡 (1)


　　the cask of amontillado
　　edgar allan poe
　　the thousand injuries of fortunato i had borne as i best could, but when he ventured upon insult, i vowed revenge. you, who so well know the nature of my soul, will not suppose, however, that i gave utterance to a threat. at length i would be avenged; this was a point definitively settled—but the very definitiveness with which it was resolved precluded the idea of risk. i must not only punish, but punish with impunity. a wrong is unredressed when retribution overtakes its redresser. it is equally unredressed when the avenger fails to make himself felt as such to him who has done the wrong.
　　it must be understood that neither by word nor deed had i given fortunato cause to doubt my good will. i continued, as was my wont, to smile in his face, and he did not perceive that my smile now was at the thought of his immolation.
　　he had a weak point—this fortunato—although in other regards he was a man to be respected and even feared. he prided himself on his connoisseurship in wine. few italians have the true virtuoso spirit. for the most part their enthusiasm is adopted to suit the time and opportunity, to practise imposture upon the british and austrian millionaires. in painting and gemmary, fortunato, like his countrymen, was a quack, but in the matter of old wines he was sincere. in this respect i did not differ from him materially; —i was skilful in the italian vintages myself, and bought largely whenever i could.
　　it was about dusk, one evening during the supreme madness of the carnival season, that i encountered my friend. he accosted me with excessive warmth, for he had been drinking much. the man wore motley. he had on a tight-fitting parti-striped dress and his head was surmounted by the conical cap and bells. i was so pleased to see him, that i thought i should never have done wringing his hand.
　　i said to him—“my dear fortunato, you are luckily met. how remarkably well you are looking today！ but i have received a pipe of what passes for amontillado, and i have my doubts.”
　　“how？”said he, “amontillado？ a pipe？ impossible ？ and in the middle of the carnival？”
　　“i have my doubts,”i replied, “and i was silly enough to pay the full amontillado price without consulting you in the matter. you were not to be found, and i was fearful of losing a bargain.”
　　“amontillado！”
　　“i have my doubts.”
　　“amontillado！”
　　“and i must satisfy them.”
　　“amontillado！”
　　“as you are engaged, i am on my way to luchresi. if any one has a critical turn, it is he. he will tell me—”
　　“luchresi cannot tell amontillado from sherry.”
　　“and yet some fools will have it that his taste is a match for your own.”
　　“come, let us go.”
　　“whither？”
　　“to your vaults.”
　　“my friend, no, i will not impose upon your good nature. i perceive you have an engagement. luchresi—”
　　“i have no engagement, —come.”
　　“my friend, no. it is not the engagement, but the severe cold with which i perceive you are afflicted. the vaults are insufferably damp. they are encrusted with nitre.”
　　“let us go, nevertheless. the cold is merely nothing. amontillado！ you have been imposed upon; and as for luchresi, he cannot distinguish sherry from amontillado.”
　　thus speaking, fortunato possessed himself of my arm. putting on a mask of black silk and drawing a roquelaure closely about my person, i suffered him to hurry me to my palazzo.
　　there were no attendants at home; they had absconded to make merry in honour of the time. i had told them that i should not return until the morning and had given them explicit orders not to stir from the house. these orders were sufficient, i well knew, to insure their immediate disappearance, one and all, as soon as my back was turned.
　　i took from their sconces two flambeaux, and giving one to fortunato, bowed him through several suites of rooms to the archway that led into the vaults. i passed down a long and winding staircase, requesting him to be cautious as he followed. we came at length to the foot of the descent, and stood together on the damp ground of the catacombs of the montresors.
　　the gait of my friend was unsteady, and the bells upon his cap jingled as he strode.
　　“the pipe,”he said .
　　“it is farther on,”said i, “but observe the white web-work which gleams from these cavern walls.”
　　he turned towards me and looked into my eyes with two filmy orbs that distilled the rheum of intoxication.
　　“nitre？”he asked at length.
　　“nitre,”i replied, “how long have you had that cough！”
　　“ugh！ ugh！ ugh！ —ugh！ ugh！ ugh！—ugh！ ugh！ ugh！ —ugh！ ugh！ ugh！—ugh！ ugh！ ugh！”
　　my poor friend found it impossible to reply for many minutes.
　　“it is nothing,”he said at last.
　　“come,”i said, with decision, “we will go back; your health is precious. you are rich, respected, admired, beloved; you are happy as once i was. you are a man to be missed. for me it is no matter. we will go back; you will be ill and i cannot be responsible. besides, there is luchresi—”
　　“enough,”he said, “the cough is a mere nothing; it will not kill me. i shall not die of a cough.”
　　“true—true,”i replied, “and, indeed, i had no intention of alarming you unnecessarily—but you should use all proper caution. a draught of this medoc will defend us from the damps.”
　　here i knocked off the neck of a bottle which i drew from a long row of its fellows that lay upon the mould.
　　“drink,”i said, presenting him the wine.
　　he raised it to his lips with a leer. he paused and nodded to me familiarly, while his bells jingled.
　　“i drink,”he said, “to the buried that repose around us.”
　　“and i to your long life.”
　　he again took my arm and we proceeded.
　　“these vaults,”he said, “are extensive.”
　　“the montresors,”i replied, “were a great and numerous family.”
　　“i forget your arms.”
　　“a huge human foot d’or, in a field azure; the foot crushes a serpent rampant whose fangs are imbedded in the heel.”
　　“and the motto？”
　　“nemo me impune lacessit.”
　　“good！”he said.




第33章 一桶白葡萄酒埃德加·爱伦·坡 (2)


　　the wine sparkled in his eyes and the bells jingled. my own fancy grew warm with the medoc. we had passed through long walls of piled bones, with casks and puncheons intermingling, into the inmost recesses of the catacombs. i paused again, and this time i made bold to seize fortunato by an arm above the elbow.
　　“the nitre！”i said, “see, it increases. it hangs like moss upon the vaults. we are below the river’s bed. the drops of moisture trickle among the bones. come, we will go back ere it is too late. your cough—”
　　“it is nothing,”he said, “let us go on. but first, another draught of the medoc.”
　　i broke and reached him a flagon of de grave. he emptied it at a breath. his eyes flashed with a fierce light. he laughed and threw the bottle upwards with a gesticulation i did not understand.
　　i looked at him in surprise. he repeated the movement—a grotesque one.
　　“you do not comprehend？”he said.
　　“not i,”i replied.
　　“then you are not of the brotherhood.”
　　“how？”
　　“you are not of the masons.”
　　“yes, yes,”i said, “yes！ yes.”
　　“you？ impossible！ a mason？”
　　“a mason,”i replied.
　　“a sign,”he said, “a sign？”
　　“it is this,”i answered, producing a trowel from beneath the folds of my roquelaure.
　　“you jest,”he exclaimed, recoiling a few paces. “but let us proceed to the amontillado.”
　　“be it so,”i said, replacing the tool beneath the cloak, and again offering him my arm. he leaned upon it heavily. we continued our route in search of the amontillado. we passed through a range of low arches, descended, passed on, and descending again, arrived at a deep crypt, in which the foulness of the air caused our flambeaux rather to glow than flame.
　　at the most remote end of the crypt there appeared another less spacious. its walls had been lined with human remains, piled to the vault overhead , in the fashion of the great catacombs of paris. three sides of this interior crypt were still ornamented in this manner. from the fourth side the bones had been thrown down, and lay promiscuously upon the earth, forming at one point a mound of some size. within the wall thus exposed by the displacing of the bones, we perceived a still interior crypt or recess, in depth about four feet, in width three, in height six or seven. it seemed to have been constructed for no especial use within itself, but formed merely the interval between two of the colossal supports of the roof of the catacombs, and was backed by one of their circumscribing walls of solid granite.
　　it was in vain that fortunato, uplifting his dull torch, endeavoured to pry into the depths of the recess. its termination the feeble light did not enable us to see.
　　“proceed,”i said, “herein is the amontillado. as for luchesi—”
　　“he is an ignoramus,”interrupted my friend, as he stepped unsteadily forward, while i followed immediately at his heels. in an instant he had reached the extremity of the niche, and finding his progress arrested by the rock, stood stupidly bewildered . a moment more and i had fettered him to the granite. in its surface were two iron staples, distant from each other about two feet, horizontally. from one of these depended a short chain. from the other a padlock. throwing the links about his waist, it was but the work of a few seconds to secure it. he was too much astounded to resist. withdrawing the key i stepped back from the recess.
　　“pass your hand,”i said, “over the wall, you cannot help feeling the nitre. indeed it is very damp. once more let me implore you to return. no？ then i must positively leave you. but i must first render you all the little attentions in my power.”
　　“the amontillado！”ejaculated my friend, not yet recovered from his astonishment.
　　“true,”i replied, “the amontillado.”
　　as i said these words i busied myself among the pile of bones of which i have before spoken. throwing them aside, i soon uncovered a quantity of building stone and mortar. with these materials and with the aid of my trowel, i began vigorously to wall up the entrance of the niche.
　　i had scarcely laid the first tier of my masonry when i discovered that the intoxication of fortunato had in a great measure worn off. the earliest indication i had of this was a low moaning cry from the depth of the recess. it was not the cry of a drunken man. there was a long and obstinate silence. i laid the second tier, and the third, and the fourth; and then i heard the furious vibrations of the chain. the noise lasted for several minutes, during which, that i might hearken to it with the more satisfaction, i ceased my labours and sat down upon the bones. when at last the clanking subsided, i resumed the trowel, and finished without interruption the fifth, the sixth, and the seventh tier. the wall was now nearly upon a level with my breast. i again paused, and holding the flambeaux over the mason-work, threw a few feeble rays upon the figure within.
　　a succession of loud and shrill screams, bursting suddenly from the throat of the chained form, seemed to thrust me violentlyback. for a brief moment i hesitated, i trembled. unsheathing my rapier, i began to grope with it about the recess; but the thought of an instant reassured me. i placed my hand upon the solid fabric of the catacombs, and felt satisfied. i reapproached the wall. i replied to the yells of him who clamoured. i reechoed, i aided, i surpassed them in volume and in strength. i did this, and the clamourer grew still.
　　it was now midnight, and my task was drawing to a close. i had completed the eighth, the ninth, and the tenth tier. i had finished a portion of the last and the eleventh; there remained but a single stone to be fitted and plastered in. i struggled with its weight; i placed it partially in its destined position. but now there came from out the niche a low laugh that erected the hairs upon my head. it was succeeded by a sad voice, which i had difficulty in recognising as that of the noble fortunato. the voice said—
    www.ｌzuoＷen．Ｃom



第34章 一桶白葡萄酒埃德加·爱伦·坡 (3)


　　“ha！ ha！ ha！—he！ he！—a very good joke, indeed—an excellent jest. we will have many a rich laugh about it at the palazzo—he！ he！ he！ —over our wine—he！ he！ he！”
　　“the amontillado！”i said.
　　“he！ he！ he！ — he！ he！ he！ — yes, the amontillado . but is it not getting late？ will not they be awaiting us at the palazzo, the lady fortunato and the rest？ let us be gone.”
　　“yes,”i said, “let us be gone.”
　　“for the love of god, montresor！”
　　“yes,”i said, “for the love of god！”
　　but to these words i hearkened in vain for a reply. i grew impatient. i called aloud —
　　“fortunato！”
　　no answer. i called again—
　　“fortunato！”
　　no answer still. i thrust a torch through the remaining aperture and let it fall within. there came forth in return only a jingling of the bells. my heart grew sick—it was the dampness of the catacombs that made it so. i hastened to make an end of my labour. i forced the last stone into its position; i plastered it up. against the new masonry i reerected the old rampart of bones. for the half of a century no mortal has disturbed them. in pace requiescat！
　　一桶白葡萄酒
　　[美国] 埃德加·爱伦·坡
　　埃德加·爱伦·坡（1809-1849），美国浪漫主义文学大师，19世纪美国最著名、最具代表性的作家之一，尤其在短篇小说的发展历史中占有突出的地位。他是短篇小说最重要的开创者，为这一文学体裁提出了较全面的指导性理论。爱伦·坡的短篇小说大致分为三类：恐怖故事、谋杀疑案和科学难解之迷。他开创了侦探小说的先河，被称为“侦探小说之父”。本文被公认为是他最完美的一篇短篇小说，也是世界最佳短篇小说之一，充分体现了他关于短篇小说的理论和风格特征。
　　福尔图纳托再三加害于我，对此，我从来都是一忍再忍，若是他敢侮辱我，我定会睚眦必报。也许，你已摸透了我的脾气，然而，说不定我真的说到做到，总有我报仇之日。这一点，我从未怀疑过。既然下定决心这样做，就排除了冒风险的想法。我不仅要让他尝尝我的厉害，还要干得不留后患。若是报了仇，自己也遭到了惩罚，那仇就未报；同样，仇人不知谁来复的仇，仇也未报。
　　不用说，福尔图纳托从来没有怀疑过我的言行举止中所隐藏的复仇动机。我依旧对他笑脸相迎，可他没看出我笑里藏刀呢！
　　在某些方面，福尔图纳托确实值得尊敬，甚至令人敬畏。但他有个弱点，他自称是品酒老手。没有几个意大利人是真正的行家，他们大多用自己的热诚、随机应变、见风使舵，使英国和奥地利的大财主上当。说起古画和珠宝，与自己的同乡一样，福尔图纳托只会骗人，但是要谈起陈酒佳酿，他还真是个行家。这一点，我们俩没有本质区别。说起意大利葡萄酒，我还算是行家，只要可能，我就尽量多买。
　　在极尽疯狂的狂欢节期间，一天晚上，大约是傍晚，我遇见了他。他很热情地与我搭话，因为他喝醉了。他穿得像小丑，一身杂色条纹紧身衣，戴一顶系着铃铛的圆尖帽。见到他，我真是高兴极了，忍不住想一直握着他的手。
　　我对他说：“啊，福尔图纳托，真是幸会啊！你今天看起来气色不错啊！我搞到一桶白葡萄酒，但我有些怀疑。”
　　“什么？”他说，“一桶白葡萄酒？不可能吧？在狂欢节？”
　　“我有些担心，”我答道，“我太傻了，没问问你就照价把钱付清了，我找不到你，又怕失去一笔交易。”
　　“白葡萄酒！”
　　“我不放心。”
　　“白葡萄酒！”
　　“我一定要解决这些疑问。”
　　“白葡萄酒！”
　　“你忙吧，我正要去找卢切西呢。假如有人能判定这酒的真伪，那人肯定是他。他会告诉我——”
　　“卢切西辨不清雪利酒和白葡萄酒。”
　　“但是仍有傻瓜觉得自己的品位和你不相上下。”
　　“我们快走吧。”
　　“去哪？”
　　“你的地窖啊！”
　　“不，不，朋友，我可不愿因为你脾气好而强你所难。我知道你正忙。卢切西——”
　　“我没事，走吧。”
　　“这可不行，朋友，这不是忙不忙的问题。天儿冷得够呛，你肯定受不了。地窖里那个潮啊，让人难以忍受，墙壁上结满了石硝。”
　　“走吧！与天儿冷有什么关系呢。白葡萄酒啊！你上当了，卢切西可不分清雪利酒和白葡萄酒。”
　　正说着，福尔图纳托就架住我的胳膊，帮我戴上黑绸面具，又用短披风裹紧身子，催着我回公馆去了。
　　佣人们趁机溜出去过节了，家里空荡荡的。我已告诉他们我早上才回来，并跟他们讲清，不要出门。我很清楚，这样一来，只要我一转身，他们个个都会立刻溜走。我从烛台上拿了两个火把，一个给了福尔图纳托，我弯腰带他穿过了几间房子，走到拱廊上，这里通往地下室。我带他走下一个长长的螺旋楼梯，边走边叮嘱他小心跟着我。终于，我们下了楼梯，站在了蒙特里梭公馆的地下室，地面又潮又湿。
　　他的身子一摇一晃，每走一步，帽子上的铃铛就当当作响。
　　“酒桶呢？”他说。
　　“就在前面，”我说道，“这墙壁坑坑洼洼的，瞧，还有那些白蜘蛛网在发光呢！小心！”
　　他回过头来，面向我，用两只醉意蒙眬的眼睛盯着我。
　　终于，他问道：“硝？”
　　“是硝，”我答道，“你咳嗽多久了？”
　　“啊，唷！啊，唷！啊，唷！啊，唷！啊，唷！啊，唷！啊，唷！啊，唷！啊，唷！ 啊，唷！啊，唷！啊，唷！啊，唷！啊，唷！啊，唷！”
　　可怜的福尔图纳托好久答不上话。
　　“没事。”最终，他说道。




第35章 一桶白葡萄酒埃德加·爱伦·坡 (4)


　　“走，”我依然坚持道，“我们还是回去吧，身体要紧。你富有，人们都尊敬你，仰慕你，爱戴你，想念你，你与曾经的我一样快乐。大家会想你的。我倒无所谓，你要是病了，我可负不起责任，我们还是回去吧。况且，还有卢切西呢——”
　　“不要说了，”他说，“咳嗽算得了什么，要不了命的，又不会咳死。”
　　“是——是，”我答道，“确实是，我不是故意吓唬你——但还是小心点好。喝口美道克酒，去去潮气。”
　　我边说边从泥地上的一长排酒瓶里，拿起了一瓶，打开盖子。
　　我把酒递给他，说道：“喝。”
　　他斜瞅了我一眼，然后把酒瓶举到嘴边，停了一下，亲密地对我点点头。
　　“干杯，”他说道，“为我们周围长眠的逝者干杯！”
　　“这杯祝你长命百岁！”
　　他又挽起我的胳膊往前走。
　　“这地窖，”他说道，“可真大啊。”
　　“蒙特里梭家是个大家族，人丁兴旺啊。”我答道。
　　“我把你们家族的纹章给忘记了。”
　　“蔚蓝的田野里，一只大脚踩着一条身子跃起的蛇，蛇已被碾碎，而蛇的牙齿已咬进脚后跟。”
　　“家训呢？”
　　“害我者必受罚。”
　　“不错！”他说道。
　　喝了酒的福尔图纳托，两眼发光，帽子上的铃铛又发出清脆的响声。喝了美道克酒的我想象力更丰富了。穿过尸骨和大小酒桶堆成的一长条夹弄，我们进了墓窖的最深处，我又停下脚步，这次我斗胆抓住了福尔图纳托的上臂。
　　“瞧！”我说道，“硝越来越多了。像青苔一样，挂在拱顶上到处都是，咱们在河床下面啦，水珠还滴落在尸骨上呢。咱们回去吧，不然就太晚了。你还咳嗽——”
　　“没关系，”他说，“继续走吧。不过，先来口美道克酒。”
　　我把一壶德格雷弗酒打开递给他。他一口气喝光了，两眼顿时发出凶光。他哈哈大笑着，用一个我不懂的怪姿势往上抛出酒瓶。
　　我惊讶地看着他，他又重复了那个动作——那个奇怪的动作。
　　“你不明白？”他说，
　　“不明白。”我回答。
　　“那你不是同道。”
　　“怎么了？”
　　“你不是共济会的。”
　　“不，我是，”我说，“是的，的确是。”
　　“你？不可能！共济会？”
　　“是共济会的。”我回答。
　　“暗号？”他说。
　　“这个。”我从短披风的褶裥下抽出一把泥刀，答道。
　　“你说笑话吧。”他惊呼道，身子往后退了几步。“我们还是继续去看白葡萄酒吧。”
　　“好吧。”我说道，重新把泥刀放到披风下面，又把胳膊伸过去，他重重地倚靠在上面，继续去找白葡萄酒。我们穿过一排低矮的拱门，沿楼梯往下走，一直往下走，最后到了一个深邃的地窖，手里的大烛台因为里面浑浊的空气，失去了火焰，只剩下火光。
　　地窖最狭窄的尽头又出现了另一个地窖，比前面的更狭窄。人骨头成排地沿着墙壁一直堆到拱顶，与巴黎的巨大地下墓穴格局相似。墓穴里的三面墙就这样堆放着骨头，第四面被推倒了。地上杂乱地堆放着人骨头，形成了一个庞大的尸骨墩。我们把那堵暴露在外的墙边上的骨头搬开，发现里面还有一个壁凹，大约四尺深，三尺宽，六七尺高。它看上去没什么特别，似乎当初建造时，并没有什么特殊用处，只不过是墓穴里两个巨大支柱间形成的间隙而已，一堵坚固的花岗岩墙壁紧靠在背后。
　　福尔图纳托徒劳地举着昏暗的火把，想窥探这个壁凹的深度。但在微弱的灯光下，什么也看不清楚。
　　“继续走，”我说，“这里面就有白葡萄酒，卢切西——”
　　“他充内行。”我的朋友打断我，他晃悠悠地往前走，我紧跟其后。很快，他走到了壁凹的尽头，发现自己的去路被一块大石头挡住了，便不知所措地傻呆在那里。片刻不到，他已经被我锁在花岗岩上了。墙面上有两个铁扣，中间相隔两英尺左右的水平间距。其中一个铁扣上有一根短链，另一个上有挂锁。他很快被拦腰锁在链子上，万无一失了。他惊骇过度，完全忘了反抗。我抽出钥匙，从壁凹里退了出来。
　　“伸出手去，”我说，“摸摸墙壁，你肯定能摸到硝，它确实非常湿啊。让我再一次恳求您回去吧，不回？那我只好离开你了。但首先我还得费心照顾你一下。”
　　“白葡萄酒！”我的朋友突然喊道，他惊魂未定，不知所措。
　　“是的。”我回答，“白葡萄酒。”
　　我边说边在上文提到的那堆骨头间忙开了，骨头被我扔到了一边。我很快找到了一些用来砌墙的石块和灰泥，开始兴奋地用泥刀和这些材料在壁凹的入口处砌起一堵墙来。
　　第一层石块几乎还没砌完，我就发现福尔图纳托酒醒了一大半。刚开始，我听见一声低沉的呻吟从壁凹深处传来，那不是喝醉的人能发出的声音。接着是长久的沉默，如同凝固了一般。我砌了第二层、第三层、接着第四层，然后，我听到了铁链激烈地晃动声，这种声音持续了好几分钟，为了听得更称心如意，我干脆停下来，坐在骨头上听。最后，叮当声沉寂下去了，我又继续砌墙，一口气砌完了第五层、第六层、第七层。现在，墙的高度差不多齐胸了，我再次停下来，将火把举过石墙，让一些微弱的光照在里面的那个人影上。
　　突然，一串尖叫声从那个被锁住的人的喉咙里发出，他好像想猛烈地回击我。我一时犹豫起来，身子颤抖不已，便拔出长剑，开始用剑在壁凹里摸索。但我很快安下心来，我摸了摸地下墓穴那坚固的建筑，感到心满意足。我走到墙壁边，回应那个乱喊乱叫的人。我回应——叫喊——比他的声音更大更响亮，他的叫喊声渐渐停息了。
　　现在是午夜，我的任务很快就要完成了，我已经砌完了第八层、第九层和第十层。十一层是最后一层，只要嵌入最后一块石头，涂上石灰就完工了。我用力托起一块石头，刚放好一个角，一阵阴沉的笑声从壁凹里传出来，吓得我头发都竖起来了。接着又是一声凄厉的惨叫。我好不容易才认出那是福尔图纳托老爷的声音。他说——
　　“哈！哈！哈！——嘻！嘻！——这真是一个有趣的笑话——绝妙的笑话。到了公馆，我们就要好好笑个痛快——嘻！嘻！嘻！——一边喝酒——嘻！嘻！嘻！”
　　“白葡萄酒！”我说。
　　“嘻！嘻！嘻！——嘻！嘻！嘻！——是的，白葡萄酒。可会不会晚了？福尔图纳托夫人她们还在公馆等我们呢，我们走吧！”
　　“好吧，”我说，“我们走吧。”
　　“看在上帝的份上，蒙特里梭！”
　　“是的，”我说，“看在上帝的份上！”
　　可是，说完这些话后，我就听不到回应了。我没了耐心，便大声喊道——
　　“福尔图纳托！”
　　没人回答，我又喊——
　　“福尔图纳托！”
　　还是没人回答，我把火把从那个还没砌上的墙孔里塞了进去，结果只听到一个叮当声。我感到一阵恶心——由于墓穴潮湿的缘故。我赶快完工，塞好最后一块石头，涂上石灰，又把骨头重新紧靠着这堵新墙堆好，五十多年来，他们还从未被人打扰过。
　　愿死者安息吧！
t



第36章 杀人者欧内斯特·海明威 (1)


　　the killers
　　ernest hemingway
　　the door of henry’s lunchroom opened and two men came in. they sat down at the counter.
　　“what’s yours？”george asked them.
　　“i don’t know,”one of the men said, “what do you want to eat, al？”
　　“i don’t know,”said al, “i don’t know what i want to eat.”
　　outside it was getting dark. the streetlight came on outside the window. the two men at the counter read the menu. from the other end of the counter nick adams watched them. he had been talking to george when they came in.
　　“i’ll have a roast pork tenderloin with apple sauce and mashed potatoes,”the first man said.
　　“it isn’t ready yet.”
　　“what the hell do you put it on the card for？”
　　“that’s the dinner,”george explained. “you can get that at six o’clock.”
　　george looked at the clock on the wall behind the counter.
　　“it’s five o’clock.”
　　“the clock says twenty minutes past five,”the second man said.
　　“it’s twenty minutes fast.”
　　“oh, to hell with the clock,”the first man said. “what have you got to eat？”
　　“i can give you any kind of sandwiches,”george said. “you can have ham and eggs, bacon and eggs, liver and bacon, or a steak.”
　　“give me chicken croquettes with green peas and cream sauce and mashed potatoes.”“that’s the dinner.”
　　“everything we want’s the dinner, eh？ that’s the way you work it.”
　　“i can give you ham and eggs, bacon and eggs, liver—”
　　“i’ll take ham and eggs,”the man called al said. he wore a derby hat and a black overcoat buttoned across the chest. his face was small and white and he had tight lips. he wore a silk muffler and gloves.
　　“give me bacon and eggs,”said the other man. he was about the same size as al. their faces were different, but they were dressed like twins. both wore overcoats too tight for them. they sat leaning forward, their elbows on the counter.
　　“got anything to drink？”al asked.
　　“silver beer, bevo, ginger-ale,”george said.
　　“i mean you got anything to drink？”
　　“just those i said.”
　　“this is a hot town,”said the other. “what do they call it？”
　　“summit.”
　　“ever hear of it？”al asked his friend.
　　“no,”said the friend.
　　“what do you do here nights？”al asked.
　　“they eat the dinner,”his friend said. “they all come here and eat the big dinner.”
　　“that’s right,”george said.
　　“so you think that’s right？”al asked george.
　　“sure.”
　　“you’re a pretty bright boy, aren’t you？”
　　“sure,”said george.
　　“well, you’re not,”said the other little man. “is he, al？”
　　“he’s dumb,”said al. he turned to nick. “what’s your name？”
　　“adams.”
　　“another bright boy,”al said. “ain’t he a bright boy, max？”
　　“the town’s full of bright boys,”max said.
　　george put the two platters, one of ham and eggs, the other of bacon and eggs, on the counter. he set down two side-dishes of fried potatoes and closed the wicket into the kitchen.
　　“which is yours？”he asked al.
　　“don’t you remember？”
　　“ham and eggs.”
　　“just a bright boy,”max said. he leaned forward and took the ham and eggs. both men ate with their gloves on. george watched them eat.
　　“what are you looking at？”max looked at george.
　　“nothing.”
　　“the hell you were. you were looking at me.”
　　“maybe the boy meant it for a joke, max,”al said.
　　george laughed.
　　“you don’t have to laugh,”max said to him. “you don’t have to laugh at all, see？”
　　“all right,”said george.
　　“so he thinks it’s all right,”max turned to al. “he thinks it’s all right. that’s a good one.”
　　“oh, he’s a thinker,”al said. they went on eating.
　　“what’s the bright boy’s name down the counter？”al asked max.
　　“hey, bright boy,”max said to nick. “you go around on the other side of the counter with your boy friend.”
　　“what’s the idea？”nick asked.
　　“there isn’t any idea.”
　　“you better go around, bright boy,”al said. nick went around behind the counter.
　　“what’s the idea？”george asked.
　　“none of your damn business,”al said. “who’s out in the kitchen？”
　　“the nigger.”
　　“what do you mean the nigger？”
　　“the nigger that cooks.”
　　“tell him to come in.”
　　“what’s the idea？”
　　“tell him to come in.”
　　“where do you think you are？”
　　“we know damn well where we are,”the man called max said, “do we look silly？”
　　“you talk silly,”al said to him. “what the hell do you argue with this kid for？ listen,”he said to george, “tell the nigger to come out here.”
　　“what are you going to do to him？”
　　“nothing. use your head, bright boy. what would we do to a nigger？”
　　george opened the slit that opened back into the kitchen. “sam,”he called. “come in here a minute.”
　　the door to the kitchen opened and the nigger came in. “what was it？”he asked. the two men at the counter took a look at him.
　　“all right, nigger. you stand right there,”al said.
　　sam, the nigger, standing in his apron, looked at the two men sitting at the counter. “yes, sir,”he said. al got down from his stool.
　　“i’m going back to the kitchen with the nigger and bright boy,”he said. “go on back to the kitchen, nigger. you go with him, bright boy.”the little man walked after nick and sam, the cook, back into the kitchen. the door shut after them. the man called max sat at the counter opposite george. he didn’t look at george but looked in the mirror that ran along back of the counter. henry’s had been made over from a saloon into a lunch-counter.
　　“well, bright boy,”max said, looking into the mirror, “why don’t you say something？”
　　“what’s it all about？”
　　“hey, al,”max called, “bright boy wants to know what it’s all about.”
　　“why don’t you tell him？”al’s voice came from the kitchen.
　　“what do you think it’s all about？”
　　“i don’t know.”
　　“what do you think？”
　　max looked into the mirror all the time he was talking.
　　“i wouldn’t say.”
　　“hey, al, bright boy says he wouldn’t say what he thinks it’s all about.”
twwＷ、xiＡbook.cＯm



第37章 杀人者欧内斯特·海明威 (2)


　　“i can hear you, all right,”al said from the kitchen. he had propped open the slit that dishes passed through into the kitchen with a catsup bottle. “listen, bright boy,”he said from the kitchen to george. “stand a little further along the bar. you move a little to the left, max.”he was like a photographer arranging for a group picture.
　　“talk to me, bright boy,”max said. “what do you think’s going to happen？”
　　george did not say anything.
　　“i’ll tell you,”max said. “we’re going to kill a swede. do you know a big swede named ole andreson？”
　　“yes.”
　　“he comes here to eat every night, don’t he？”
　　“sometimes he comes here.”
　　“he comes here at six o’clock, don’t he？”
　　“if he comes.”
　　“we know all that, bright boy,”max said. “talk about something else. ever go to the movies？”
　　“once in a while.”
　　“you ought to go to the movies more. the movies are fine for a bright boy like you.”
　　“what are you going to kill ole andreson for？ what did he ever do to you？”
　　“he never had a chance to do anything to us. he never even seen us.”
　　“and he’s only going to see us once,”al said from the kitchen.
　　“what are you going to kill him for, then？”george asked.
　　“we’re killing him for a friend. just to oblige a friend, bright boy.”
　　“shut up,”said al from the kitchen. “you talk too goddamn much.”
　　“well, i got to keep bright boy amused. don’t i, bright boy？”
　　“you talk too damn much,”al said. “the nigger and my bright boy are amused by themselves. i got them tied up like a couple of girl friends in a convent.”
　　“i suppose you were in a convent.”
　　“you never know.”
　　“you were in a kosher convent. that’s where you were.”
　　george looked up at the clock.
　　“if anyone comes in you tell them the cook is off, and if they keep after it, you tell them you’ll go back and cook yourself. do you get that, bright boy？”
　　“all right,”george said. “what you going to do with us afterward？”
　　“that’ll depend,”max said. “that’s one of those things you never know at the time.”
　　george looked up at the clock. it was a quarter past six. the door from the street opened. a street-car motorman came in.
　　“hello, george,”he said. “can i get supper？”
　　“sam’s gone out,”george said. “he’ll be back in about half an hour.”
　　“i’d better go up the street,”the motorman said. george looked at the clock. it was twenty minutes past six.
　　“that was nice, bright boy,”max said. “you’re a regular little gentleman.”
　　“he knew i’d blow his head off,”al said from the kitchen.
　　“no,”said max. “it ain’t that. bright boy is nice. he’s a nice boy. i like him.”
　　at six-fifty-five george said, “he’s not coming.”
　　two other people had been in the lunchroom. once george had gone out to the kitchen and made a ham-and-egg sandwich “to go”that a man wanted to take with him. inside the kitchen he saw al, his derby hat tipped back, sitting on a stool beside the wicket with the muzzle of a sawed-off shotgun resting on the ledge. nick and the cook were back to back in the corner, a towel tied in each of their mouths. george had cooked the sandwich, wrapped it up in oiled paper, put it in a bag, brought it in, and the man had paid for it and gone out.
　　“bright boy can do everything,”max said. “he can cook and everything. you’d make some girl a nice wife, bright boy.”
　　“yes？”george said. “your friend, ole andreson, isn’t going to come.”
　　“we’ll give him ten minutes,” max said.
　　max watched the mirror and the clock. the hands of the clock marked seven o’clock, and then five minutes past seven.
　　“come on, al,” said max. “we better go. he’s not coming.”
　　“better give him five minutes,”al said from the kitchen.
　　in the five minutes a man came in, and george explained that the cook was sick.
　　“why the hell don’t you get another cook？”the man asked. “aren’t you running a lunch counter？”he went out.
　　“come on, al,”max said.
　　“what about the two bright boys and the nigger？”
　　“they’re all right.”
　　“you think so？”
　　“sure. we’re through with it.”
　　“i don’t like it,”said al. “it’s sloppy. you talk too much,”
　　“oh, what the hell,”said max. “we got to keep amused, haven’t we？”
　　“you talk too much, all the same,”al said. he came out from the kitchen. the cut-off barrels of the shotgun made a slight bulge under the waist of his too tight-fitting overcoat. he straightened his coat with his gloved hands.
　　“so long, bright boy,”he said to george. “you got a lot of luck.”
　　“that’s the truth,”max said. “you ought to play the races, bright boy.”
　　the two of them went out the door. george watched them, through the window, pass under the arc light and cross the street. in their tight overcoats and derby hats they looked like a vaudeville team. george went back through the swinging door into the kitchen and untied nick and the cook.
　　“i don’t want any more of that,”said sam, the cook. “i don’t want any more of that.”
　　nick stood up. he had never had a towel in his mouth before.
　　“say,”he said. “what the hell？”he was trying to swagger it off.
　　“they were going to kill ole andreson,”george said. “they were going to shoot him when he came in to eat.”
　　“ole andreson？”
　　“sure.”
　　the cook felt the corners of his mouth with his thumbs.
　　“they all gone？”he asked.
　　“yeah,”said george. “they’re gone now.”
　　“i don’t like it,”said the cook. “i don’t like any of it at all.”
　　“listen,”george said to nick. “you better go see ole andreson.”
　　“all right.”
　　“you better not have anything to do with it at all,”sam, the cook, said. “you better stay way out of it.”
　　“don’t go if you don’t want to,”george said.
　　“mixing up in this ain’t going to get you anywhere,”the cook said. “you stay outof it.”
　　“i’ll go see him,”nick said to george. “where does he live？”
　　the cook turned away.
　　“little boys always know what they want to do,”he said.
下…… 书 ……网



第38章 杀人者欧内斯特·海明威 (3)


　　“he lives up at hirsch’s rooming house,”george said to nick.
　　“i’ll go up there.”
　　outside the arc light shone through the bare branches of a tree. nick walked up the street beside the car tracks and turned at the next arc light down a side street. three houses up the street was hirsch’s rooming house. nick walked up the two steps and pushed the bell. a woman came to the door.
　　“is ole andreson here？”
　　“do you want to see him？”
　　“yes, if he’s in.”
　　nick followed the woman up a flight of stairs and back to the end of a corridor. she knocked on the door.
　　“who is it？”
　　“it’s somebody to see you, mr. andreson,”the woman said.
　　“it’s nick adams.”
　　“come in.”
　　nick opened the door and went into the room. ole andreson was lying on the bed with all his clothes on. he had been a heavyweight prizefighter and he was too long for the bed. he lay with his head on two pillows. he did not look at nick.
　　“what was it？”he asked.
　　“i was up at henry’s,”nick said, “and two fellows came in and tied up me and the cook, and they said they were going to kill you.”
　　it sounded silly when he said it. ole andreson said nothing.
　　“they put us out in the kitchen,”nick went on. “they were going to shoot you when you came in to supper.”
　　ole andreson looked at the wall and did not say anything.
　　“george thought i better come and tell you about it.”
　　“there isn’t anything i can do about it,”ole andreson said.
　　“i’ll tell you what they were like.”
　　“i don’t want to know what they were like,”ole andreson said. he looked at the wall. “thanks for coming to tell me about it.”
　　“that’s all right”
　　nick looked at the big man lying on the bed.
　　“don’t you want me to go and see the police？”
　　“no,”ole andreson said. “that wouldn’t do any good.”
　　“isn’t there something i could do？”
　　“no. there ain’t anything to do.”
　　“maybe it was just a bluff.”
　　“no. it ain’t just a bluff.”
　　ole andreson rolled over toward the wall.
　　“the only thing is,”he said, talking toward the wall, “i just can’t make up my mind to go out. i been in here all day.”
　　“couldn’t you get out of town？”
　　“no,”ole andreson said. “i’m through with all that running around.”
　　he looked at the wall.
　　“there ain’t anything to do now.”
　　“couldn’t you fix it up some way？”
　　“no. i got in wrong.”he talked in the same flat voice. “there ain’t anything to do. after a while i’ll make up my mind to go out.”
　　“i better go back and see george,”nick said.
　　“so long,”said ole andreson. he did not look toward nick. “thanks for coming around.”
　　nick went out. as he shut the door he saw ole andreson with all his clothes on, lying on the bed looking at the wall.
　　“he’s been in his room all day,”the landlady said downstairs. “i guess he don’t feel well. i said to him: ’mr. andreson, you ought to go out and take a walk on a nice fall day like this,’ but he didn’t feel like it.”
　　“he doesn’t want to go out.”
　　“i’m sorry he don’t feel well,”the woman said. “he’s an awfully nice man. he was in the ring, you know.”
　　“i know it.”
　　“you’d never know it except from the way his face is,”the woman said. they stood talking just inside the street door. “he’s just as gentle.”
　　“well, goodnight, mrs. hirsch,”nick said.
　　“i’m not mrs. hirsch,”the woman said. “she owns the place. i just look after it for her. i’m mrs. bell.”
　　“well, goodnight, mrs. bell,”nick said.
　　“goodnight,”the woman said.
　　nick walked up the dark street to the corner under the arc light, and then along the car tracks to henry’s eating house. george was inside, back of the counter.
　　“did you see ole？”
　　“yes,”said nick. “he’s in his room and he won’t go out.”
　　the cook opened the door from the kitchen when he heard nick’s voice.
　　“i don’t even listen to it,”he said and shut the door.
　　“did you tell him about it？”george asked.
　　“sure. i told him but he knows what it’s all about.”
　　“what’s he going to do？”
　　“nothing.”
　　“they’ll kill him.”
　　“i guess they will.”
　　“he must have got mixed up in something in chicago.”
　　“i guess so,”said nick.
　　“it’s a hell of a thing.”
　　“it’s an awful thing,”nick said.
　　they did not say anything. george reached down for a towel and wiped the counter.
　　“i wonder what he did？”nick said.
　　“double-crossed somebody. that’s what they kill them for.”
　　“i’m going to get out of this town,”nick said.
　　“yes,”said george. “that’s a good thing to do.”
　　“i can’t stand to think about him waiting in the room and knowing he’s going to get it. it’s too damned awful.”
　　“well,”said george, “you better not think about it.”
　　杀人者
　　[美国] 欧内斯特·海明威
　　欧内斯特·海明威（1899-1961），20世纪美国著名小说家，生于伊利诺伊州芝加哥市郊。他的作品风格独具魅力，在世界范围内产生了广泛影响。1926年发表的《太阳照样升起》是海明威获得声誉的第一部长篇小说，并成为“迷惘的一代”的代表作品。一战给海明威留下了难以愈合的心灵创伤，为他创作举世名作《永别了，武器》提供了素材。1952年，中篇小说《老人与海》出版，轰动文坛，并使他获得了诺贝尔文学奖。
　　亨利家的小餐馆门被推开了，两个男人走进来，在柜台边坐了下来。
　　“你们想吃什么呢？”乔治问他们。
　　“我不知道。”其中一个人说道，“艾尔，你想吃什么？”
　　“我不知道，”艾尔说，“我不大清楚自己想吃什么。”
　　外面天色越来越暗，窗外的街灯映进屋来，坐在柜台边的那两个男人正看着菜单。而柜台的另一面，尼克·亚当斯正打量着他们，刚才他在跟乔治说话的时候见他们进来的。
　　“我要一份烤猪肉里脊加苹果酱和土豆。”头一个人说。
　　“它们还没有弄好呢。”
　　“那你他妈的干吗写上菜单呐？”
　　“那是晚餐的菜谱，”乔治解释说，“六点钟的时候就能吃。”
　　乔治看了一下柜台后面墙壁上的闹钟。
　　“五点啦。”
　　“钟指示的是五点二十分了。”第二个男的说。
　　“它快了二十分钟。”
　　“噢，真他妈的是个破钟，”第一个男的问，“那你们这儿还有什么吃的？”
　　“我们这儿有多种三明治，”乔治说，“你们可以吃火腿蛋、熏肉蛋、肝加熏肉或者牛排。”
　　“给我来份炸仔鸡饼，配上青豆、奶油、生菜和土豆。”
　　“那是晚餐的菜。”
　　“我们要的样样都是晚餐的菜，呃？你们就是这样做生意的？”
　　“我们可以给你火腿蛋、熏肉蛋、肝……”
　　“我要火腿蛋。”那个叫艾尔的人说道。他戴顶礼帽，穿件黑大衣，胸前有一排纽扣。他的脸狭小而苍白，嘴巴紧闭着，围着丝巾，戴着手套。
　　“给我熏肉蛋，”另一个人说，他跟艾尔简直是一个模样，面孔不同，穿得却像一对双胞胎。两人紧裹着大衣，双手压在柜台上，身子前倾歪在那里。
　　“有什么喝的啊？”艾尔问。
　　“啤酒、葡萄酒、姜汁酒。”乔治说。
　　“我问你们有什么好喝的？”
　　“就是我刚才说的那些。”
　　“这真是个销赃城，”另一个人说，“人们管它叫什么了？”
　　“顶尖。”
　　“听过这种说法吗？”艾尔问他的朋友。
　　“没有。”他朋友说。
　　“你们这儿晚上干什么？”艾尔问，
　　“聚餐，”他朋友说，“他们都来这儿吃晚饭。”
　　“对。”乔治说。
　　“你认为对吗？”艾尔问乔治。
　　“当然。”
　　“你是个非常聪明的家伙，不是吗？”
　　“当然。”乔治答道。
　　“唔哦，你不是，”另一个小个子说，“他是吗？艾尔？”
　　“他是个哑巴，”艾尔说，他转向尼克，“你叫什么？”
下…书 网



第39章 杀人者欧内斯特·海明威 (4)


　　“亚当斯。”“又是个聪明的家伙，”艾尔说道，“他不机灵吗？麦克斯？”
　　“这个城里都是些聪明人。”麦克斯说。
　　乔治放下两个盘子，一盘火腿蛋，一盘熏肉蛋，他又放下两碟炸土豆片，然后关上了通往厨房的那扇门。
　　“哪盘是你的？”他问艾尔。
　　“你自己不记得啊？”
　　“火腿蛋。”
　　“真聪明，”麦克斯说，他探身向前拿了火腿蛋。两个人都戴着手套吃饭，乔治在一旁看着他们吃。
　　“你看什么。”麦克斯盯着乔治。
　　“没什么。”
　　“混蛋，你他妈的看我。”
　　“这小子可能只是开了个玩笑，麦克斯。”艾尔说道。
　　乔治微微一笑。
　　“你不能笑，”麦克斯对他说道，“你不能笑，听见了吗？”
　　“好吧。”乔治说。
　　“他说好的，”麦克斯转向艾尔，“他说好的，真是个好家伙。”
　　“噢，他是个思想家。”艾尔说，他们继续吃饭。
　　“柜台那边那个聪明的家伙叫什么了？”艾尔问麦克斯
　　“嘿，那个聪明的小子，”麦克斯向尼克叫道，“你跟你朋友到柜台那边去。”
　　“什么意思？”尼克问道，
　　“没什么意思。”
　　“你最好过去，聪明的家伙。”艾尔说，尼克走到柜台后面去了。
　　“什么意思？”乔治问。
　　“没你事儿，”艾尔说，“谁在厨房里？”
　　“一个黑人。”
　　“黑鬼在干什么？”
　　“做菜。”
　　“叫他进来。”
　　“什么意思？”
　　“叫他进来！”
　　“你以为你在哪里呢？”
　　“我们知道在哪儿，”那个叫麦克斯的男子说道，“当我们是傻子吗？”
　　“你说的就是傻话，”艾尔对他说，“他妈的跟他争什么，听着，”他对乔治说，“告诉那个黑鬼，让他到这儿来。”
　　“你们想要他干什么？”
　　“没事儿，用用你的脑子，聪明的家伙，我们要一个黑鬼来做什么？”
　　乔治打开那扇通往厨房的小门，“萨姆，”他叫道，“你过来一下。”
　　门开了，那个黑人走了进来，“什么事儿啊？”他问，柜台边的那两个人看了他一眼。
　　“好的，黑鬼，你就站在那儿。”艾尔说。
　　萨姆，一个黑人，系着围裙站在那里，看着柜台边的那两个人，“好的，先生，”他说。艾尔从凳子上下来。
　　“我和这个黑鬼，还有那聪明的小子一起回厨房去，”他说，“回厨房，黑鬼，你跟他一起走，聪明的小子。”这个小个子跟在尼克和厨子萨姆的后面去了厨房。门随后被关上了。那个叫麦克斯的男人坐在乔治的对面。他没有看乔治，而是看着挂在柜台后面的那排镜子，亨利的这家小餐馆是由一个小酒吧改装而成的。
　　“噢，机灵的小子，”麦克斯说，“怎么不说点什么呢？”
　　“这究竟是怎么回事？”
　　“嘿，艾尔，”麦克斯叫道，“这个聪明的小子想知道这是怎么回事。”
　　“你为什么不告诉他呀？”艾尔的声音从厨房传出来。
　　“你认为这是怎么回事呢？”
　　“我不知道。”
　　“你认为呢？”
　　麦克斯说话的时候也一直看着镜子。
　　“我说不上。”
　　“嘿，艾尔，聪明的小子说他说不上这到底是怎么回事。”
　　“我听到了，行了。”艾尔在厨房里说。他用一个番茄汁的瓶子把那个用来递盆子的洞弄大些，“听着，聪明的家伙，”他从厨房里对乔治说，“站到吧台那边去，你往左边挪一挪，麦克斯。”他跟个摄影师似的好像要摆弄个漂亮的造型。
　　“跟我聊聊，聪明小子，”麦克斯说到，“你想一会儿会发生什么事情？”
　　乔治没有说话。
　　“我来告诉你，”麦克斯说，“我们要杀一个瑞典佬，你认识那个叫奥利·安德烈森的大个子吧？”
　　“是的。”
　　“他每天晚上都来这吃饭，对吧？”
　　“他有时候是来这儿。”
　　“他来这儿是六点钟，对吧？”
　　“如果他来的话，是的。”
　　“这些我们都知道，聪明小子，”麦克斯说到，“聊点别的吧，看过电影吗？”
　　“偶尔去一下。”
　　“你应该多看看电影，对于像你这样聪明的小伙子来说，电影是个很不错的东西。”
　　“你们为什么要杀奥利·安德烈森？他曾经对你们做过什么吗？”
　　“他从来没有机会对我们怎么样，他从来都没有见过我们。”
　　“当然，他会跟我们见一次面的。”艾尔在厨房说，
　　“那你们为什么要杀他呢？”乔治问。
　　“我们为一个朋友杀他，就是受人之托，聪明小子。”
　　“闭嘴！”艾尔在厨房嚷道，“你他妈的废话真多。”
　　“呜，我得和这个聪明小子乐一乐，不是吗？聪明小子？”
　　“你废话太多了。”艾尔说，这个黑鬼和我的聪明小子会自娱自乐的，我把他们捆得跟修道院的那对女朋友一样。”
　　“我还以为你真进了修道院呢。”
　　“你懂个屁！”
　　“你还呆在一个清净的修道院呢，你就是在那儿。”
　　乔治抬头看看钟。
　　“如果有人进来，你告诉他们厨子不在，如果他们不走，你就跟他们说，你会亲自给他们做。懂了吗？聪明小子？”
　　“好吧，”乔治说，“那你打算怎么处置我们呢？”
　　“看情况吧，”麦克斯说，“这是一时还不能让你们知道的事情之一。”
　　乔治看着时钟，六点一刻了，临街的那扇门开了，一个市内电车司机走了进来。
　　“你好，乔治，”他说，“有晚饭吃了吗？”
　　“萨姆出去了，”乔治说，“他可能要半个钟头后才回来。”
　　“我还是去别处看看吧。”那个司机说。乔治看看时钟，六点二十了。
　　“好小子，真是聪明，”麦克斯说，“你可真是个地道的小绅士。”
　　“他知道我会扭断他的脖子。”艾尔在厨房说道。
　　“不，”麦克斯说道，“不是这样的，聪明小子是好样的，他可是个好小子，我喜欢他。”
　　到六点五十五分了，乔治说，“他不会来了。”
　　这时小店已经来过两个人了，其中一个，乔治进了厨房为他做了一份袋装的火腿蛋，让他随手带走。在厨房，他看到艾尔把他的礼帽挂在后脑勺上，坐在便门旁的一张小凳子上，架子上支着一支锯断了的散弹枪。尼克和那厨子背靠背倚在墙角，嘴里各塞着一条毛巾。乔治做了三文治，用油纸包好，装入袋子，拿了进来，那人付了钱走了。
　　“聪明小子什么都能干，”麦克斯说，“他能烧能煮，样样都行，你能让一个小姑娘变成一个好妻子的，聪明小子。”
　　“是吗？”乔治说，“你的朋友，奥利·安德烈森不会来了。”
　　“我们再给他十分钟。”麦克斯说。
　　麦克斯看着镜子和时钟，时针指向七点了，很快已经是七点过五分了。
　　“过来，艾尔。”麦克斯说，“我们还是走吧，他不会来了。”
　　“再等五分钟。”艾尔在厨房说。
　　五分钟还没到，一个人进来了，乔治解释说，厨子病了。
　　“你他妈的干吗不再找个厨子？”那个人问，“你不是在开餐馆吗？”他走出去了。
　　“出来，艾尔。”麦克斯说。
　　“这两个聪明的家伙，和黑鬼怎么样了？”
　　“他们没事。”
　　“是吗？”
　　“当然，我们这就完事了。”
　　“我不喜欢这玩意儿，”艾尔说，“不爽，你太多废话了。”
　　“噢，他妈的，”麦克斯说，“我们总得乐一乐，不是吗？”
　　“总之，你说多了。”艾尔说，他从厨房出来，他紧绷的大衣又在腰间插着那只锯了枪筒的散弹枪，显的鼓鼓的。他用戴手套的手把上衣拉好。
　　“再见，聪明小子，”他对乔治说，“你运气真好。”
　　“这倒是真的，”麦克斯说，“你应该去赌赌赛马，聪明小子。”
　　他们走了出去。乔治透过窗户看见他们从弧光灯下走过去，穿过大街。他们穿着紧身大衣，戴着礼帽，就像是杂技团的。乔治回身穿过转门，进入厨房，松开了尼克和厨子。
　　“我再也不想碰到这种事了，”厨子萨姆说，“我再也不想碰到这种事了。”
　　尼克站起来，他从来没被塞过毛巾在嘴里。
　　“说说，”他嚷着，“他妈的这是怎么一回事？”他想充好汉，装成满不在乎的样子。
　　“他们要杀死奥利·安德烈森，”乔治说，“他们打算趁他来吃饭的时候杀死他。”
　　“奥利·安德烈森？”
　　“是的。”
　　厨子用手摸摸他的嘴角。
　　“他们都走了吗？”他问道。
　　“走了，”乔治说，“他们现在都走了。”
　　“我不喜欢这事儿。”厨子说，“我一点都不喜欢这事儿。”
　　“听我说，”乔治对尼克说，“你最好去看看奥利·安德烈森。”
　　“好的。”
　　“你最好别插手这件事儿。”厨子萨姆说。
　　“你最好别卷进去。”
　　“你不想去就算了。”乔治说，
　　“插手这事对你一点好处都没有，”厨子说，“你最好别管。”
　　“我要去看看他，”尼克对乔治说，“他住在哪里？”
　　厨子转身走了。
　　“小孩子也知道自己想干什么。”他说。
　　“他住在赫希的公寓里。”乔治对尼克说。
　　“我去那看看。”
　　外面的弧光灯映着光秃秃的树影。尼克沿着车轨向街上走去，在另一个弧光灯下转弯，走上另一条小街，这条小街上的第三栋房子就是赫希的公寓。尼克踏上两级台阶，按铃，一个女人开了门。
　　“奥利·安德烈森住在这儿吗？”
　　“你要见他吗？”
　　“是的，如果他在的话。”
　　尼克跟着这个女人上了楼梯，走到走廊尽头，她敲了敲门。
　　“谁啊？”
　　“有人要见你，安德烈森先生。”那个女人说道。
　　“我是尼克·亚当斯。”
　　“进来！”
　　尼克推开门，走进房间。奥利·安德烈森和衣躺在床上，他曾经是个重量级的职业拳击手，他个子太高了，床显得有些小。他头枕在两只枕头上，并不看尼克。
　　“有什么事吗？”他问。
　　“我刚才在亨利的小餐馆里，”尼克说，“有两个人进来了把我和那个厨子绑了起来，他们说他们要杀你。”
　　他说这话时显得有点愚笨。奥利·安德烈森一言不发。
　　“他们把我们关进厨房，”尼克继续说道，“他们打算等你来吃晚饭的时候杀死你。”
　　奥利·安德烈森看着墙壁，什么也没说。
　　“乔治觉得我应该到这儿来告诉你。”
　　“这种事情我有什么办法呢？”奥利·安德烈森说。
　　“我会告诉你他们是什么样子。”
　　“我不想知道他们是什么样，”奥利·安德烈森说，他望着墙壁，“谢谢你来告诉我。”
　　“没什么。”
　　尼克看着床上这个大个子：
　　“你想要我去一趟警察局吗？”
　　“不，”奥利·安德烈森说，“去了也没什么用。”
　　“我能为你做点什么吗？”
　　“不了，也没什么。”
　　“也许，这只是一种恐吓吧？”
　　“不，这不仅仅是一种恐吓。”
　　奥利·安德烈森翻过身去，面向墙壁。
　　“唯一的问题是，”他向着墙壁说道，“我就是不能决定出不出去，我整天躺在这儿。”
　　“你不能离开这个城市吗？”
　　“不，”奥利·安德烈森说，“我已经跑够了。”
　　他望着墙壁。
　　“现在什么办法都没有了。”
　　“你不能想办法了结这事吗？”
　　“不，我已经得罪别人了。”他无力地说道，“毫无办法，过会儿，我决定出去一趟。”
　　“我还是回去看看乔治。”尼克说。
　　“再见，”奥利·安德烈森说，他并没有看尼克，“谢谢你过来。”
　　尼克出去了，他关门的时候看见奥利·安德烈森穿着衣服躺在床上，面向着墙壁。
　　“他整天呆在房里，”女房东在楼下说，“我想他可能身体不好，我对他说，奥利·安德烈森先生，像这种秋高气爽的好日子，您应该出去散步啊，’可他好像不喜欢那样。”
　　“他不想出去。”
　　“他身体不好，真叫人难过，”那个妇女说，“他是个很和善的人，你知道他是拳击手吧。”
　　“我知道。”
　　“只有从他的脸上，你才看得出来，”那个妇女说。他们就站在街边的小门里说话，“他可真是和气。”
　　“好吧，晚安，赫希太太。”
　　“我不是赫希太太，”那个妇女说，“这地方是她的，我只是替她看房子，我是贝尔太太。”
　　“哦，晚安，贝尔太太。”
　　“晚安。”那个女人说。
　　尼克走在深黑的大街上，到弧光灯下的拐角处，在沿着车轨回到亨利的小饭馆。乔治在里头，柜台后面。
　　“你见到奥德了吗？”
　　“是的，”尼克说，“他在自己房里，不想出去。”
　　那个厨子听到尼克的声音，打开厨房门。
　　“这种话我连听都不要听。”说着他又把门关上了。
　　“你告诉他了吗？”乔治问。
　　“当然，我跟他说了，其实他什么都知道了。”
　　“他打算怎么做？”
　　“没什么打算。”
　　“他们要杀他啊！”
　　“我想是的。”
　　“他一定是在芝加哥搅上了什么事情。”
　　“我想也是。”尼克说。
　　“是件麻烦事儿。”
　　“是件可怕的事。”
　　他们不再说什么了，乔治拿到一条毛巾，擦着柜台。
　　“我想他干了些什么呢？”尼克说。
　　“出卖了什么人吧，所以他们要杀他。”
　　“我打算离开这个城市。”尼克说。
　　“好吧，”乔治说，“这是件好事。”
　　“我真不忍心看他就这样呆在房子里，明知要出事了却无能为力，这太可怕了。”
　　“噢，”乔治说，“你最好别想这件事了。”
  www.7wenxue.com



第40章 献给爱米丽的一朵玫瑰威廉·福克纳 (1)


　　a rose for miss emily
　　william  faulkner
　　when miss emily grierson died, our whole town went to her funeral: the men through a sort of respectful affection for a fallen monument , the women mostly out of curiosity to see the inside of her house, which no one save an old manservant—a combined gardener and cook—had seen in at least ten years.
　　it was a big, squarish frame house that had once been white, decorated with cupolas and spires and scrolled balconies in the heavily light-some style of the seventies, set on what had once been our most select street. but garages and cotton gins had encroached and obliterated even the august names of that neighborhood; only miss emily’s house was left, lifting its stubborn and coquettish decay above the cotton wagons and the gasoline pumps—an eyesore among eyesores. and now miss emily had gone to join the representatives of those august names where they lay in the cedar-bemused cemetery among the ranked and anonymous graves of union and confederate soldiers who fell at the battle of jefferson.
　　alive, miss emily had been a tradition, a duty, and a care; a sort of hereditary obligation upon the town, dating from that day in 1894 when colond sartoris, the mayor—he who fathered the edict that no negro woman should appear on the streets without an apron—remitted her taxes, the dispensation dating from the death of her father on into perpetuity. not that miss emily would have accepted charity. colonel sartoris invented an involved tale to the effect that miss emily’s father had loaned money to the town, which the town, as a matter of business, preferred this way of repaying. only a man of colonel sartoris’ generation and thought could have invented it, and only a woman could have believed it.
　　when the next generation, with its more modern ideas, became mayors and aldermen , this arrangement created some little dissatisfaction. on the first of the year they mailed her a tax notice. february came, and there was no reply. they wrote her a formal letter, asking her to call at the sheriff’s office at her convenience. a week later the mayor wrote her himself, offering to call or to send his car for her, and received in reply a note on paper of an archaic shape, in a thin, flowing calligraphy in faded ink, to the effect that she no longer went out at all. the tax notice was also enclosed, without comment.
　　they called a special meeting of the board of aldermen. a deputation waited upon her, knocked at the door through which no visitor had passed since she ceased giving china-painting lessons eight or ten years earlier. they were admitted by the old negro into a dim hall from which a stairway mounted into still more shadow. it smelled of dust and disuse—a close, dank smell. the negro led them into the parlor. it was furnished in heavy, leather-covered furniture. when the negro opened the blinds of one window, they could see that the leather was cracked; and when they sat down, a faint dust rose sluggishly about their thighs, spinning with slow motes in the single sun-ray. on a tarnished gilt easel before the fireplace stood a crayon portrait of miss emily’s father.
　　they rose when she entered—a small, fat woman in black, with a thin gold chain descending to her waist and vanishing into her belt, leaning on an ebony cane with a tarnished gold head. her skeleton was small and spare; perhaps that was why what would have been merely plumpness in another was obesity in her. she looked bloated, like a body long submerged in motionless water, and of that pallid hue. her eyes, lost in the fatty ridges of her face, looked like two small pieces of coal pressed into a lump of dough as they moved from one face to another while the visitors stated their errand.
　　she did not ask them to sit. she just stood in the door and listened quietly until the spokesman came to a stumbling halt. then they could hear the invisible watch ticking at the end of the gold chain.
　　her voice was dry and cold. “i have no taxes in jefferson. colonel sartoris explained it to me. perhaps one of you can gain access to the city records and satisfy yourselves.”
　　“but we have. we are the city authorities, miss emily. didn’t you get a notice from the sheriff, signed by him？”
　　“i received a paper, yes,”miss emily said. “perhaps he considers himself the sheriff... i have no taxes in jefferson.”
　　“but there is nothing on the books to show that, you see. we must go by the—”
　　“see colonel sartoris. i have no taxes in jefferson.’’
　　”but, miss emily—“
　　”see colonel sartoris. “ (colonel sartoris had been dead almost ten years. )”i have no taxes in jefferson. tobe！“the negro appeared, ”show these gentlemen out.“
　　ii
　　so she vanquished them, horse and foot, just as she had vanquished their fathers thirty years before about the smell. that was two years after her father’s death and a short time after her sweetheart—the one we believed would marry her—had deserted her. after her father’s death she went out very little; after her sweetheart went away, people hardly saw her at all. a few of the ladies had the temerity to call, but were not received, and the only sign of life about the place was the negro man—a young man then—going in and out with a market basket.
　　“just as if a man—any man—could keep a kitchen properly, ”the ladies said; so they were not surprised when the smell developed. it was another link between the gross, teeming world and the high and mighty criersons.
　　a neighbor, a woman, complained to the mayor, judge stevens, eighty years old.
　　“but what will you have me do about it, madam？” he said.
　　“why, send her word to stop it,” the woman said, “isn’t there a law？”
www.7wenxue.com  



第41章 献给爱米丽的一朵玫瑰威廉·福克纳 (2)


　　“i’m sure that won’t be necessary,”judge stevens said, “it’s probably just a snake or a rat that nigger of hers killed in the yard. i’ll speak to him about it.”
　　the next day he received two more complaints, one from a man who came in diffident deprecation. “we really must do something about it, judge. i’d be the last one in the world to bother miss emily, but we’ve got to do something.”that night the board of aldermen met—three graybeards and one younger man, a member of the rising generation.
　　“it’s simple enough,”he said. “send her word to have her placecleaned up. give her a certain time to do it in, and if she don’t ...”
　　“dammit, sir, ”judge stevens said, “will you accuse a lady to her face of smelling bad？”
　　so the next night, after midnight, four men crossed miss emily’s lawn and slunk about the house like burglars, sniffing along the base of the brickwork and at the cellar openings while one of them performed a regular sowing motion with his hand out of a sack slung from his shoulder. they broke open the cellar door and sprinkled lime there, and in all the outbuildings. as they recrossed the lawn, a window that had been dark was lighted and miss emily sat in it, the light behind her, and her upright torso motionless as that of an idol. they crept quietly across the lawn and into the shadow of the locusts that lined the street. after a week or two the smell went away.
　　that was when people had begun to feel really sorry for her. people in our town, remembering how old lady wyatt, her great-aunt, had gone completely crazy at last, believed that the griexsons held themselves a little too high for what they really were. none of the young men were quite good enough for miss emily and such. we had long thought of them as a tableau; miss emily a slender figure in white in the background, her father a spraddled silhouette in the foreground, his back to her and clutching a horsewhip, the two of them framed by the back-flung front doors. so when she got to be thirty and was still single, we were not pleased exactly, but vindicated; even with insanity in the family she wouldn’t have turned down all of her chances if they had really materialized.
　　when her father died, it got about that the house was all that was left to her; and in a way, people were glad. at last they could pity miss emily. being left alone, and a pauper, she had become humanized. now she too would know the old thrill and the old despair of a penny more or less.
　　the day after his death all the ladies prepared to call at the house and offer condolence and aid, as is our custom. miss emily met them at the door, dressed as usual and with no trace of grief on her face. she told them that her father was not dead. she did that for three days, with the ministers calling on her, and the doctors, trying to persuade her to let them dispose of the body. just as they were about to resort to law and force, she broke down. and they buried her father quickly.
　　we did not say she was crazy then. we believed she had to do that. we remembered all the young men her father had driven away, and we knew that with nothing left, she would have to cling to that which had robbed her, as people will.
　　iii
　　she was sick for a long time. when we saw her again, her hair was cut short, making her look like a girl, with a vague resemblanee to those angels in colored church windows—sort of tragic and serene.
　　the town had just let the contracts for paving the sidewalks, and in the summer after her father’s death they began to work. the construction company came with niggers and mules and machinery, and a foreman named homer barron, a yankee—a big, dark, ready man, with a big voice and eyes lighter than his face. the little boys would follow in groups to hear him cuss the niggers, and the niggers singing in time to the rise and fall of picks. pretty soon he knew everybody in town whenever you heard a lot of laughing anywhere about the square, homer barron would be in the center of the group. presently we began to see him and miss emily on sunday afternoons driving in the yellow-wheeled buggy and the matched team of bays from the livery stable.
　　at first we were glad that miss emily would have an interest, because the ladies all said, “of course a grierson would not think seriously of a northerner, a day laborer. ”but there were still others, older people, who said that even grief could not cause a real lady to forget noblesse oblige—without calling it noblesse oblige. they just said, “poor emily. her kinsfolk should come to her.”she had some kin in alabama; but years ago her father had fallen out with them over the estate of old lady wyatt, the crazy woman, and there was no communication between the two families. they had not even been represented at the funeral.
　　and as soon as the old people said, “poor emily”, the whispering began. “do you suppose it’s really so？”they said to one another. “of course it is. what else could...”this behind their hands: rustling of craned silk and satin behind jalousies closed upon the sun of sunday afternoon as the thin, swift clop-clop-clop of thematched team passed: “poor emily”.
　　she carried her head high enough—even when we believed that she was fallen. it was as if she demanded more than ever the recognition of her dignity as the last grierson; as if it had wanted that touch of earthiness to reaffirm her imperviousness. like when she bought the rat poison, the arsenic. that was over a year after they had begun to say “poor emily.”and while the two female cousins were visiting her.
www、mdwenxue.com



第42章 献给爱米丽的一朵玫瑰威廉·福克纳 (3)


　　“i want some poison, ”she said to the druggist. she was over thirty then, still a slight woman, though thinner than usual with cold, haughty black eyes in a face the flesh of which was strained across the temples and about the eye-sockets as you imagine a lighthouse-keeper’s face ought to look. “i want some poison, ”she said.
　　“yes, miss emily. what kind？ for rats and such？ i’d recommend—”
　　“i want the best you have. i don’t care what kind.”
　　the druggist named several. “they’ll kill anything up to an elephant. but what you want is—”
　　“arsenic, ”miss emily said “is that a good one？”
　　“is... arsenic？ yes ma’am. but what you want—”
　　“i want arsenic.”
　　the druggist looked down at her. she looked back at him, erect, her face like a strained flag. “why, of course,”the druggist said. “if that’s what you want. but the law requires you to tell what you are going to use it for.”
　　miss emily just stared at him, her head tilted back in order to look him eye for eye, until he looked away and went and got the arsenic and wrapped it up. the negro delivery boy brought her the package; the druggist didn’t come back. when she opened the package at home there was written on the box, under the skull and bones: “for rats.”
　　iv
　　so the next day we all said, “she will kill herself”; and we said it would be the best thing. when she had first begun to be seen with homer barron, we had said, “she will marry him. ”then we said, “she will persuade him yet,”because homer himself had remarked—he liked men, and it was known that he drank with the younger men in the elk’s club—that he was not a marrying man. later we said, “poor emily,”behind the jalousies as they passed on sunday afternoon in the glittering buggy, miss emily with her head high and homer barron with his hat cocked and a cigar in his teeth, reins and whip in a yellow glove.
　　then some of the ladies began to say that it was a disgrace to the town and a bad example to the young people. the men did not want to interfere, but at last the ladies forced the baptist minister—miss emily’s people were episcopal—to call upon her. he would never divulge what happened during that interview, but he refused to go back again. the next sunday they again drove about the streets, and the following day the minister’s wife wrote to miss emily’s relations in alabama.
　　so she had blood-kin under her roof again and we sat back watch developments. at first nothing happened. then we were sure that they were to be married. we learned that miss emily had been to the jeweler’s and ordered a man’s toilet set in silver, with the letters h. b. on each piece. two days later we learned that she had bought a complete outfit of men’s clothing, including a nightshirt, and we said, “they are married. ”we were really glad. we were glad because the two female cousins were even more grierson than miss emily had ever been.
　　so we were not surprised when homer barron—the streets had been finished some time since—was gone. we were a little disappointed that there was not a public blowing-off, but we believed that he bad gone on to prepare for miss emily’s coming, or to give her a chance to get rid of the cousins. (by that time it was a cabal, and we were all miss emily’s allies to help circumvent the cousins. ) sure enough, after another week they departed. and, as we had expected all along, within three days homer barron was back in town. a neighbor saw the negro man admit him at the kitchen door at dusk one evening.
　　and that was the last we saw of homer barron. and of miss emily for some time. the negro man went in and out with the market basket, but the front door remained closed. now and then we would see her at a window for a moment, as the men did that night when they sprinkled the lime, but for almost six months she did not appear on the streets. then we knew that this was to be expected too; as if that quality of her father which had thwarted her woman’s life so many times had been too virulent and too furious to die.
　　when we next saw miss emily, she had grown fat and her hair was turning gray. during the next few years it grew grayer and grayer until it attained an even pepper-and-salt iron-gray, when it ceased turning. up to the day of her death at seventy-four it was still that vigorous iron-gray, like the hair of an active man.
　　from that time on her front door remained closed, save for a period of six or seven years, when she was about forty, during which she gave lessons in china-painting. she fitted up a studio in one of the downstairs rooms, where the daughters and granddaughters of colonel sartoris’ contemporaries were sent to her with the same regularity and in the same spirit that they were sent to church on sundays with a twenty-five cent piece for the collection plate. meanwhile her taxes had been remitted.
　　then the newer generation became the backbone and the spirit of the town, and the painting pupils grew up and fell away and did not send their children to her with boxes of color and tedious brushes and pictures cut from the ladies’ magazines. the front door closed upon the last one and remained closed for good. when the town got free postal delivery miss emily alone refused to let them fasten the metal numbers above her door and attach a mailbox to it. she would not listen to them.
  www.7wenxue.com



第43章 献给爱米丽的一朵玫瑰威廉·福克纳 (4)


　　daily, monthly, yearly we watched the negro grow grayer and more stooped, going in and out with the market basket. each december we sent her a tax notice, which would be returned by the post office a week later, unclaimed. now and then we would see her in one of the downstairs windows—she had evidently shut up the top floor of the house—like the carven torso of an idol in a niche, looking or not looking at us, we could never tell which. thus she passed from generation to generation—dear, inescapable, impervious, tranquil, and perverse.
　　and so she died. fell ill in the house filled with dust and shadows, with only a doddering negro man to wait on her. we did not even know she was sick; we had long since given up trying to get any information from the negro. he talked to no one, probably not even to her, for his voice had grown harsh and rusty, as if from disuse.
　　she died in one of the downstairs rooms, in a heavy walnut bed with a curtain, her gray head propped on a pillow yellow and moldy with age and lack of sunlight.
　　the negro met the first of the ladies at the front door and let them in, with their hushed, sibilant voices and their quick, curious glances, and then he disappeared. he
　　walked right through the house and out the back and was not seen again.
　　the two female cousins came at once. they held the funeral on the second day, with the town coming to look at miss emily beneath a mass of bought flowers, with the crayon face of her father musing profoundly above the bier and the ladies sibilant and macabre, and the very old men—some in their brushed confederate uniforms—on the porch and the lawn, talking of miss emily as if she had been a contemporary of theirs, believing that they had danced with her and courted her perhaps, confusing time with its mathematical progression, as the old do, to whom all the past is not a diminishing road, but, instead, a huge meadow which no winter ever quite touches, divided from them now by the narrow bottleneck of the most recent decade of years.
　　already we knew that there was one room in that region above stairs which no one had seen in forty years, and which would have to be forced. they waited until miss emily was decently in the ground before they opened it.
　　the violence of breaking down the door seemed to fill this room with pervading dust. a thin, acrid pall as of the tomb seemed to lie everywhere upon this room decked and furnished as for a bridal: upon the valance curtains of faded rose color, upon the rose-shaded lights, upon the dressing table, upon the delicate array of crystal and the man’s toilet things backed with tarnished silver, silver so tarnished that the monogram was obscured. among them lay a collar and tie, as if they had just been removed, which, lifted, left upon the surface a pale crescent in the dust. upon a chair hung the suit, carefully folded; beneath it the two mute shoes and the discarded socks.
　　the man himself lay in the bed.
　　for a long while we just stood there, looking down at the profound and fleshless grin. the body had apparently once lain in the attitude of an embrace, but now the long sleep that outlasts love, that conquers even the grimace of love, had cuckolded him. what was left of him, rotted beneath what was left of the nightshirt, had become inextricable from the bed in which he lay; and upon him and upon the pillow beside him lay that even coating of the patient and biding dust.
　　then we noticed that in the second pillow was the indentation of a head. one of us lifted something from it, and leaning forward, that faint and invisible dust dry and acrid in the nostrils, we saw a long strand of iron-gray hair.
　　献给爱米丽小姐的一朵玫瑰
　　[美国] 威廉·福克纳
　　威廉·福克纳（1897-1962），20世纪前半期美国最伟大的作家之一，他的作品被批评家看成是20世纪美国南方文学发展的顶峰。他于1949年获得诺贝尔文学奖，1950年获国家图书奖，1954年和1963年两次获普利策奖。他的作品几乎概括了整个美国南方社会，涉及各个阶级、阶层的人。代表作有《圣殿》《声音与疯狂》《八月之光》等。
　　爱米丽·格里尔生小姐去世的时候，我们镇上所有的人都去参加了她的葬礼：男人们是因为对这座纪念碑的倒下怀着某种敬意；女人们则大部分是出于好奇，想看看她的房子里面，那里除了一个老仆人——花匠兼厨子之外，近十多年来，没有一个人进去过。
　　这是一幢四方形的大木屋，过去曾漆成白色，装点着炮台和尖顶，配上带涡形花纹的阳台，透出一股浓厚的19世纪70年代的风格。它位于我们镇上当时最考究的街道上，但是，车库和轧棉机甚至与之类似的有损名誉的东西，都被驱逐出境，抹得没有留下一丝痕迹，只留下爱米丽小姐的房子，兀自耸立在棉花车和汽油泵中，衰败的风姿高踞于上，显得顽固不化——简直是丑中之丑。现在，爱米丽小姐也加入了这些庄严人物的行列，他们躺在这些显得困惑无比的雪松群中——这里一排排的墓地都是南北战争时期在杰斐逊战役中阵亡的无名军人的。
　　爱米丽小姐在世时，始终是传统和义务的化身，备受人们关注。她在镇上享有一种世袭权利，从1894年那天开始，也就是镇长沙多里斯上校颁布了一道法令：黑人妇女必须系围裙上街时，便永久豁免了她的税收，从她父亲去世开始。爱米丽小姐并不是很愿意接受施舍，沙多里斯上校编了个谎言，说她父亲曾借给镇里一笔钱，所以，作为某种交易，用这种方式来偿还。这只有沙多里斯这代人和他这样的头脑才编得出来，也只有妇人才会相信。
　　当下一代人中更具现代意识的镇长和参议员上任时，这种安排引起了一些小小的不满。那年元旦，他们寄了一张纳税通知单给她，到了二月份，也没见任何回复。他们又给她写了公函，让她方便时去一趟治安官办公室。又过了一个星期，镇长亲自写信给她，提出愿意登门拜访或者派车来接她，结果收到了一张古香古色的信笺便条，上面用褪了色的墨水写着细小、流畅的笔迹。大意是说，她根本不再外出，纳税通知单原样返回，没有任何评论。
　　参议员召开了一次特殊会议，派出一个代表团去访问她。他们敲了敲门，这扇门自从八年或十年前，她停止教瓷器彩绘课以后，就再也没有人进来过。他们被一个黑人男仆领进幽暗的大厅，再从楼梯上去，显得更加阴暗。屋子里有一股封闭已久的灰尘和废弃物的气味——窒息而又阴冷、潮湿。黑人引着他们进入客厅，里面摆着的笨重家具都用皮革包裹着，黑人打开一扇窗帘后，他们看见皮革已经裂开了。当他们坐下来时，臀下缓缓升起一阵灰尘，在光束下飞舞旋转。壁炉前挂着爱米丽小姐父亲的蜡笔画像，画架已经失去了金色的光泽。
　　她一进屋，他们都站了起来。她是一个矮小且肥胖的女人，一袭黑衣，带着一条细细的金链垂到了腰部，隐在腰带里，手里拄着一根乌木拐杖，拐杖头已经失去了金属光泽。她骨骼瘦小、削弱，也许，这就是为什么在别的女人身上看来是丰满的，而在她身上则显得肥胖的原因。她看上去臃肿无比，就像一具长时间泡在水里的尸体，肤色也那样惨白。她的眼睛凹陷在脸上肥肉的褶皱里，活像两个小煤块挤进生面团。当他们开始说明来意时，那两个小煤块便不断地从这张脸移到那张脸。
　　她没有让他们坐下来，只是站在门口，默默地听着，直到发言人结结巴巴地说完，才听见金链子另一端隐藏着的一块手表的滴答声。
　　她的声音冷若冰霜，“我在杰弗逊没有税。沙多里斯上校早就跟我说过了，你们任何人都可以去查镇政府档案，自己去弄清楚。”
　　“可我们已经查过了，我们就是政府权力部门，爱米丽小姐。镇长亲自签署的通知，您没有收到吗？”
　　“我是收到了一份通知，”爱米丽小姐说道，“也许，他自认为是镇长……我在杰弗逊没有税要纳。”
　　“但是，纳税册上完全没有任何记录，您知道，我们必须根据……”
　　“去找沙多里斯上校，在杰弗逊我无税可纳。”
　　“可是，爱米丽小姐……”
　　“去找沙多里斯上校（沙多里斯上校已经死了差不多十年了），在杰弗逊我无税可纳，托比！”黑人出现了，“送这些先生们出去！”
　　就这样，她打败了他们，打得他们人仰马翻，就像三十年前，为了那股气味，她打败了他们的父辈一样。那是她父亲去世两年后，不久，她的心上人——我们都以为他会跟她结婚——抛弃了她。她父亲死后，她就很少出门；她的心上人离开她后，人们根本就看不见她了。有几个妇女卤莽地去拜访她，但被她拒绝。那个地方唯一的生命迹象就是黑人男子，那时他还是个年轻人——挎着一个篮子进进出出。
 



第44章 献给爱米丽的一朵玫瑰威廉·福克纳 (5)


　　“好像一个男人——任何男人——都完全能够收拾好厨房似的。”妇女们说，所以，对于越来越浓的气味，她们也就不奇怪了。这也成为芸芸众生与高贵的、有权有势的世界的另一种联系。
　　邻居当中有一个妇女向镇长斯蒂芬斯抱怨，镇长今年已经八十岁了。
　　“可是，太太，这事你叫我怎么办呢？”他说。
　　“为什么不通告她弄掉气味呢？”妇女说道，“这不是有法可依吗？”
　　“我肯定没有这个必要，”法官斯蒂芬斯说，“可能只是她那个黑鬼在院子里打死了一条蛇或一只老鼠，我会跟他说说的。”
　　第二天，他又接到了两起抱怨，一个男人怯生生地强烈反对道：“我们确实应该做点什么了，法官先生，我是最不想打扰爱米丽小姐的，但是，我们总得采取点什么措施。”那天晚上，全体参议员召开了会议，包括三位老人和一个年轻人——新一代的一员。
　　“很简单，”他说“通知她限期把屋子打扫干净，不然……”
　　“该死的，先生，”法官斯蒂芬斯说，“你能当面指责一个女士她那儿有难闻的味道吗？”
　　于是，第二天晚上，午夜过后，四个男人像夜贼一样，穿过爱米丽小姐的草坪，潜入她的房子，沿着墙角和地窖开口处不停地嗅。其中一个人肩上挎着一个大袋子，机械地不停用手从袋子里抓出什么东西撒播在地上。他们打开地窖门，在那儿撒石灰，所有的外屋也都撒上了。
　　当他们再次穿过草坪时，一扇原本黑暗的窗户亮了，爱米丽小姐坐在里面，身后有一盏灯，她像一尊残缺不全的雕塑，直直地、一动不动地坐在那里。他们蹑手蹑脚地穿过草坪，走到街道两旁的洋槐树下。过了一两个星期，气味消失了。
　　这时，人们才开始真正为她难过，我们镇上的人记起了韦亚特老太太——她的姑奶奶——最后完全变成了疯子。我们相信格里尔生家族的人都自视甚高，不知道自己真正的地位。对于爱米丽小姐和她这样的人来说，没有哪个年轻人配得上她。长期以来，我们把他们看成是戏剧中的场景：背景处爱米丽小姐身材苗条，一袭白裙。前面是她的父亲叉开腿站着的侧影，他手里举着马鞭，背对着她。向后开的前门刚好框住了他们。所以，当爱米丽小姐年近三十仍然单身时，我们实在没有一丝欣喜，只是更加确信她的家族有着精神错乱的遗传，不然，她总不至于错过所有的机会——如果有的话。
　　她父亲死后，据说那所房子就是留给她的全部财产，从某种程度上来说，人们有些高兴了。至少他们可以怜悯一下爱米丽小姐了。孤苦无依、贫穷潦倒。她也变得有些人情味了，如今她也知道为多了一便士而激动得发抖，为少了一便士而痛苦绝望了。
　　她父亲死后的第二天，所有的妇女都准备去拜访她，表示哀悼和愿意提供援助，这是我们的习俗。爱米丽小姐在门口接见她们，她的穿着打扮和往常一样，脸上一丝哀容也没有。她告诉她们，她的父亲没有死。她这样做了三天后，牧师也来拜访她，医生们都试着劝她，让他们来处理掉尸体。正当他们准备诉诸法律，使用强制手段时，她累垮了。于是，他们很快把她父亲的尸体埋葬了。
　　我们那时都没有说她疯了，我们相信她是无法控制自己。我们记得所有的年轻人被她父亲赶走，也知道她现在一无所有，她只好死死拖住抢走了她一切的那个人，就像所有的人都会那样做。
　　爱丽米小姐病了很长一段时间。当我们再次见到她时，她的头发已经剪短了，看起来像个小姑娘，也有些像教堂彩色窗户上的天使——带着几分悲哀肃静。
　　镇上要铺设人行道，已经定好了契约。那年夏天，也就是她的父亲去世后的那年，建筑公司开始工作了，他们带来大批黑人、骡子和机器。其中有一个工头叫荷默·伯隆，他是一个高大、黝黑、精干的北方人，他声音洪亮，眼睛比脸色更明亮。小孩子们一群群地跟在他后面，听他用不堪入耳的话责骂黑人，黑人们则伴着铁镐的起落，唱着歌曲。
　　很快，镇上所有的人都认识他了，在广场上，人们随时随地都可以听到他的哈哈大笑声，荷默·伯隆肯定在人群中心。不久，我们开始看到他和爱米丽小姐在星期天下午驾着轻便马车游玩，黄色车轮与枣红马十分相称。
　　刚开始，我们看到爱米丽小姐有了一些兴致，都很高兴。因为妇女们都说，“当然，格里尔生家的人是不会认真对待一个北方佬工人的。”不过其他人也这样说，特别是老人，“即使是悲伤也不应该令一个真正的贵妇人忘记举止高贵’”——尽管他们从未叫过她贵妇人。他们只是说，“可怜的爱米丽，她的亲人应该来看看她了。”她在阿拉巴马州有一些亲戚，但是，很多年前，为了韦亚特老太太——那个疯女人的产权，她的父亲跟他们闹翻了。从此两家再也没有联系，他们甚至都没有来参加葬礼。
　　老人们一说起“可怜的爱米丽”，又开始窃窃私语了。“你想这是真的吗？”他们交头接耳，用手捂着嘴说道，“当然，是的，不然会是什么呢……”星期日下午，马车得得的蹄声过后，人们关上百叶窗阻挡午后的骄阳，还可以听见绸缎的声：“可怜的爱米丽。”
　　她高昂着头——即使是当我们确信她已经堕落后——似乎她作为最后高贵的格里尔生家族的尊严，需要得到世俗更多的认可；似乎她需要更多地接触世俗来重申她的坚守。像那次她买老鼠药——砒霜一样，那是人们开始说“可怜的爱米丽”一年多后，她的两个堂妹来看她的时候。
　　“我要买点毒药。”她对药剂师说，那时她已经三十多岁了，仍是一个消瘦的女人，比以往更显单薄了，脸上太阳穴和眼窝处的肉绷得很紧，一双黑眼睛发出冷漠、高傲的光芒。就像你想象中的灯塔守望人的表情一样。“我想要一些毒药。”她说。
　　“好的，爱米丽小姐，你要哪种？灭鼠之类的吗？我建议——”
　　“我要你这里最有效的，什么种类都行。”
　　药剂师说出几种，“它们连大象都能毒死，你要哪种呢？”
　　“砒霜，”爱米丽小姐说，“它最有效吗？”
　　“是……砒霜吗？好的，小姐，可是，你要的是……”
　　“我要砒霜。”
　　药剂师低头看着她，她直直地回望着他，脸像一面绷紧的旗帜。“哦，当然，”药剂师说道，“如果你想要那个的话，按法律，你要说明你打算用它来干什么。”
　　爱米丽小姐只是稍稍往后仰起头，死死地盯着他，直盯得他发怵，他转移视线，然后去拿砒霜，包好后，让黑人送货员拿出来递给她，自己没有出来。爱米丽小姐回家打开包装后，看见盒子里一个骷髅头下写着“老鼠用药”。
　　所以，第二天我们都说，“她会自杀”，都认为这是再好不过的了。当她开始和荷默·伯隆一起露面时，我们说过，“她要跟他结婚了”。后来又说，“不过，她还得劝劝他。”因为，荷默曾说过——他喜欢男人，我们都知道他经常在麋鹿俱乐部和年轻人喝酒——他是个独身主义者。后来，每逢星期天下午，我们在百叶窗后面看见爱米丽小姐高昂着头，荷默歪戴着帽子，嘴里叼着雪茄，手上戴着黄色手套握住了缰绳和马鞭。他们闪亮的轻便马车奔驰而过时，我们都忍不住说，“可怜的爱米丽”。
　　于是，一些妇女开始说，这是全镇的侮辱，年轻人的坏榜样。男人们都不想理会，但最终，妇女们迫使浸礼会牧师——爱米丽小姐的家族都是圣公会的——去拜访她。但他从不透漏拜访的经过，也拒绝再次拜访。接下来的一个星期天，他们再次驾车出现在大街上。第二天，牧师的妻子给爱米丽小姐在阿拉巴马的亲戚写了信。
　　于是，她又和亲戚们住在一起了，我们静观其变。刚开始一切都很平静，后来，我们都确信他们快要结婚了。我们听说爱米丽小姐去珠宝店，订购了一套银质的男式盥洗用具，每一件上都刻着“荷伯”的名字。过了两天，我们又听说，她买了全套男式服装，甚至包括睡衣。我们都说，“他们结婚了”。我们确实很高兴，因为比起爱米丽小姐来，她的两位堂姐妹更具格里尔生家族的风范。
　　所以，对于荷默·伯隆的离开，我们并不感到惊讶——街道已经完工一段时间了。我们只是有些失望没有一番热闹的送行，但是，我们相信他的离开只是去筹备迎娶爱米丽小姐，或者给她机会打发走两个堂姐。（到这个时候，我们达成了一个共识，都成了爱米丽小姐的同盟，帮助她打发掉这对堂姐妹。）果然不出所料，过了一个星期后，她们都离开了。并且，荷默·伯隆，一如我们所期待的，回到了镇上。一天傍晚，一个邻居亲眼看见那个黑人让他从厨房门进去了。
　　那是我们最后一次见到荷默·伯隆，爱米丽小姐也有很长一段时间没有出现过。只有那个黑人提着购物篮出进，但始终关着前门。我们偶尔看到爱米丽小姐的身影在窗户边停留，就像那晚男人们撒石灰粉时看到的那样。但是，几乎六个多月，她始终没有在大街上出现。后来，我们想这也是意料之中的事，她的父亲曾三番五次地阻挠她作为女人的生活，性格过于恶毒和狂暴，到现在似乎还余威未尽。
　　当我们再次见到爱米丽小姐时，她已经发胖，头发变得灰白。接下来的几年里，她的头发越来越灰，直到变得椒盐色的铁灰，便恒定不变了。到她七十四岁去世的那天，这种铁灰色依然旺盛，像一个壮年男子的头发。
　　从那以后，她的前门始终关闭，只有在她四十岁左右的那六七年间，她开授瓷器彩绘课的时候除外。她在楼下的一间房子布置了一个画室，沙多里斯少校那代人，准时把女儿和孙女们送到她那里，如同礼拜天把她们送到教堂一样认真严肃，还准备好二角伍分让她们捐献。在这期间，她的税已经被免除了。
　　后来，新一代的人成了全镇的栋梁和精髓，学画的学生们长大以后，都离开了。她们并没有让自己的孩子们带着颜料盒和单调的画笔、从妇女杂志上剪下来的图片到她那儿来。自从最后一个学生离开后，前门也就永远地关闭了。当全镇实行免费邮递之后，唯独爱米丽小姐拒绝让他们在她家门上订金属号码牌和邮筒，她始终不听他们的劝告。
　　日子一天天、一月月、一年年地过去了，我们看着黑人的头发越来越灰白，背也越来越驼了，他依旧提着购物篮出出进进。每年十二月，我们寄一张纳税通知单给她，但总会在一个星期后被退回来——无人认领。我们偶尔能在楼下的一个窗口见到她——很显然，楼上已经被她封闭起来了——她就像神龛里偶像的雕塑躯干，不知道她是不是一直在盯着我们。就这样，她经历了一代又一代——高贵、宁静、怪僻、乖张，难以否认其存在。
　　就这样，她走到了生命的尽头。在那栋遍布灰尘、阴暗无比的房子里，她病倒了，只有颤颤巍巍的黑人侍候她。我们甚至不知道她病了，也早就放弃了从黑人那里打听什么消息。他从不与人交谈，或许对她也是如此。他的嗓子好像因为长期不用，而变得嘶哑。
　　她死在楼下的一间屋子里挂着帷幕的胡核桃木床上。由于多年不见阳光，她灰白头下的枕头已经黄得发霉了。
　　黑人在前门迎接第一批妇女，请她们进屋。她们低沉地窃窃私语，好奇的目光迅速地扫视周围。黑人很快消失了，他径直穿过房子，从后门走出去，从此踪迹全无。
　　很快，两位堂姐妹赶到了，她们在第二天举办了葬礼，全镇的人都跑来看，爱米丽小姐的尸体上盖满了鲜花，棺材上方悬挂着她父亲一脸沉思的炭笔画像。妇女们低声谈论着死亡，有些老人——穿着他们刷过的盟军制服——在走廊上、草坪上议论着爱米丽小姐的生平事迹，好像她是他们的同代人，相信自己曾与她跳过舞，或许还向她求过爱。他们跟所有的老年人一样，被按数学级数前进的时间弄糊涂了。他们总以为过去的岁月不是一条逐渐远去的路，而是一片未经任何冬天摧残的广袤大草原，只是现在被近十年来的阻隔分割开来了。
　　我们已经知道，有一个房间在楼上某个地方，四十多年来从未有人见过，必须撬门才能进入。等到爱米丽小姐高雅地下葬后，他们打开了它。
　　撞门地猛烈震动好像激起了满屋的尘土。这间房子弥漫着坟墓一般的阴森，却装饰得像新房：褪了色的玫瑰红的窗帘，玫瑰状的灯饰、梳妆台，精致的水晶陈设，失去光泽的银白色男式盥洗用具，已经无法辨认刻在上面的姓名。其中还有一个上衣领口和领带，好像刚从身上取下来。拿起来时，厚厚的灰尘印下了一个淡淡的月牙痕迹。一张椅子上放着一套折叠齐整的衣服，下面有一双寂静的鞋，还有一双被丢弃的袜子。
　　那个男人躺在床上。
　　很长一段时间，我们只是站在那里，低头看着那个龇牙咧嘴的头骨。很显然，那个尸体曾是一个拥抱的姿势，但是现在，比爱情更长久的死亡征服了爱情的嘲弄，也终止了爱情。他留下的尸体，已经在破碎的睡衣里腐烂，与他躺着的木床黏合在一起，无法分离。日积月累的灰尘在他的身体和枕头周围覆盖了厚厚的一层。
　　后来，我们注意到第二个枕头上有人头压过的痕迹。一个人从上面拿起什么东西，我们凑上前去，鼻孔里立刻钻入一股隐隐的干涩的臭味，我们看见一缕长长的铁灰色头发。
  www.7wenxＵe.com



第45章 警察与赞美诗欧·亨利 (1)


　　the cop and the anthem
　　o. henry
　　on his bench in madison square soapy moved uneasily. when wild geese honk high of nights, and when women without sealskin coats grow kind to their husbands, and when soapy moves uneasily on his bench in the park, you may know that winter is near at hand.
　　a dead leaf fell in soapy’s lap. that was jack frost’s card. jack is kind to the regular denizens of madison square, and gives fair warning of his annual call. at the corners of four streets he hands his pasteboard to the north wind, footman of the mansion of all outdoors, so that the inhabitants thereof may make ready.
　　soapy’s mind became cognisant of the fact that the time had come for him to resolve himself into a singular committee of ways and means to provide against the coming rigour. and therefore he moved uneasily on his bench.
　　the hibernatorial ambitions of soapy were not of the highest. in them were no considerations of mediterranean cruises, of soporific southern skies or drifting in the vesuvian bay. three months on the island was what his soul craved. three months of assured board and bed and congenial company, safe from boreas and bluecoats, seemed to soapy the essence of things desirable.
　　for years the hospitable blackwell’s had been his winter quarters. just as his more fortunate fellow new yorkers had bought their tickets to palm beach and the riviera each winter, so soapy had made his humble arrangements for his annual hegira to the island. and now the time was come. on the previous night three sabbath newspapers, distributed beneath his coat, about his ankles and over his lap, had failed to repulse the cold as he slept on his bench near the spurting fountain in the ancient square. so the island loomed large and timely in soapy’s mind. he scorned the provisions made in the name of charity for the city’s dependents. in soapy’s opinion the law was more benign than philanthropy. there was an endless round of institutions, municipal and eleemosynary, on which he might set out and receive lodging and food accordant with the simple life. but to one of soapy’s proud spirit the gifts of charity are encumbered. if not in coin you must pay in humiliation of spirit for every benefit received at the hands of philanthropy. as caesar had his brutus, every bed of charity must have its toll of a bath, every loaf of bread its compensation of a private and personal inquisition. wherefore it is better to be a guest of the law, which though conducted by rules, does not meddle unduly with a gentleman’s private affairs.
　　soapy, having decided to go to the island, at once set about accomplishing his desire. there were many easy ways of doing this. the pleasantest was to dine luxuriously at some expensive restaurant; and then, after declaring insolvency, be handed over quietly and without uproar to a policeman. an accommodating magistrate would do the rest.
　　soapy left his bench and strolled out of the square and across the level sea of asphalt, where broadway and fifth avenue flow together. up broadway he turned, and halted at a glittering café, where are gathered together nightly the choicest products of the grape, the silkworm and the protoplasm.
　　soapy had confidence in himself from the lowest button of his vest upward. he was shaven, and his coat was decent and his neat black, ready-tied four-in-hand had been presented to him by a lady missionary on thanksgiving day. if he could reach a table in the restaurant unsuspected, success would be his. the portion of him that would show above the table would raise no doubt in the waiter’s mind. a roasted mallard duck, thought soapy, would be about the thing—with a bottle of chablis, and then camembert, a demi-tasse and a cigar. one dollar for the cigar would be enough. the total would not be so high as to call forth any supreme manifestation of revenge from the café management; and yet the meat would leave him filled and happy for the journey to his winter refuge.
　　but as soapy set foot inside the restaurant door the head waiter’s eye fell upon his frayed trousers and decadent shoes. strong and ready hands turned him about and conveyed him in silence and haste to the sidewalk and averted the ignoble fate of the menaced mallard.
　　soapy turned off broadway. it seemed that his route to the coveted island was not to be an epicurean one. some other way of entering limbo must be thought of.
　　at a corner of sixth avenue electric lights and cunningly displayed wares behind plate-glass made a shop window conspicuous. soapy took a cobblestone and dashed it through the glass. people came running round the corner, a policeman in the lead. soapy stood still, with his hands in his pockets, and smiled at the sight of brass buttons.
　　“where’s the man that done that?” inquired the officer, excitedly.
　　“don’t you figure out that i might have had something to do with it?” said soapy, not without sarcasm, but friendly, as one greets good fortune.
　　the policeman’s mind refused to accept soapy even as a clue. men who smash windows do not remain to parley with the law’s minions. they take to their heels. the policeman saw a man halfway down the block running to catch a car. with drawn club he joined in the pursuit. soapy, with disgust in his heart, loafed along, twice unsuccessful.
　　on the opposite side of the street was a restaurant of no great pretensions. it catered to large appetites and modest purses. its crockery and atmosphere were thick; its soup and napery thin. into this place soapy took his accusive shoes and telltale trousers without challenge. at a table he sat and consumed beefsteak, flapjacks, doughnuts and pie. and then to the waiter he betrayed the fact that the minutest coin and himself were strangers.
　　“now, get busy and call a cop,” said soapy. “and don’t keep a gentleman waiting.”
　　“no cop for youse,” said the waiter, with a voice like butter cakes and an eye like the cherry in a manhattan cocktail. “hey, con！”
  www.7wenxＵe.com



第46章 警察与赞美诗欧·亨利 (2)


　　neatly upon his left ear on the callous pavement two waiters pitched soapy. he arose joint by joint, as a carpenter’s rule opens, and beat the dust from his clothes. arrest seemed but a rosy dream. the island seemed very far away. a policeman who stood before a drug store two doors away laughed and walked down the street.
　　five blocks soapy travelled before his courage permitted him to woo capture again. this time the opportunity presented what he fatuously termed to himself a “cinch.” a young woman of a modest and pleasing guise was standing before a show window gazing with sprightly interest at its display of shaving mugs and inkstands, and two yards from the window a large policeman of severe demeanour leaned against a waterplug.
　　it was soapy’s design to assume the role of the despicable and execrated “masher.” the refined and elegant appearance of his victim and the contiguity of the conscientious cop encouraged him to believe that he would soon feel the pleasant official clutch upon his arm that would insure his winter quarters of the right little, tight little isle.
　　soapy straightened the lady missionary’s ready-made tie, dragged his shrinking cuffs into the open, set his hat at a killing cant and sidled toward the young women. he made eyes at her, was taken with sudden coughs and “hems,” smiled, smirked, and went brazenly through the impudent and contemptible litany of the “masher.” with half an eye soapy saw that the policeman was watching him fixedly. the young woman moved away a few steps, and again bestowed her absorbed attention upon the shaving mugs. soapy followed, boldly stepping to her side, raised his hat and said:
　　“ah there, bedelia！ don’t you want to come and play in my yard？”
　　the policeman was still looking. the persecuted young woman had but to beckon a finger and soapy would be practically en route for his insular haven. already he imagined he could feel the cosy warmth of the station-house. the young woman faced him and, stretching out a hand, caught soapy’s coat sleeve.
　　“sure, mike,” she said joyfully, “if you’ll blow me to a pail of suds. i’d have spoke to you sooner, but the cop was watching.”
　　with the young woman playing the clinging ivy to his oak soapy walked past the policeman overcome with gloom. he seemed doomed to liberty.
　　at the next corner he shook off his companion and ran. he halted in the district where by night are found the lightest streets, hearts, vows and librettos. women in furs and men in greatcoats moved gaily in the wintry air. a sudden fear seized soapy that some dreadful enchantment had rendered him immune to arrest. the thought brought a little of panic upon it, and when he came upon another policeman lounging grandly in front of a transplendent theatre he caught at the immediate straw of “disorderly conduct.”
　　on the sidewalk soapy began to yell drunken gibberish at the top of his harsh voice. he danced, howled, raved, and otherwise disturbed the welkin.
　　the policeman twirled his club, turned his back to soapy and remarked to a citizen:
　　“tis one of them yale lads celebratin’ the goose egg they give to the hartford college. noisy; but no harm. we’ve instructions to lave them be.”
　　disconsolate, soapy ceased his unavailing racket. would never a policeman lay hands on him? in his fancy the island seemed an unattainable arcadia. he buttoned his thin coat against the chilling wind.
　　in a cigar store he saw a well-dressed man lighting a cigar at a swinging light. his silk umbrella he had set by the door on entering. soapy stepped inside, secured the umbrella and sauntered off with it slowly. the man at the cigar light followed hastily.
　　“my umbrella,” he said sternly.
　　“oh, is it?” sneered soapy, adding insult to petit larceny. “well, why don’t you call a policeman? i took it. your umbrella！ why don’t you call a cop? there stands one on the corner.”
　　the umbrella owner slowed his steps. soapy did likewise, with a presentiment that luck would run against him. the policeman looked at the two curiously.
  



第47章 警察与赞美诗欧·亨利 (3)


　　“of course,” said the umbrella man—“that is—well, you know how these mistakes occur—i—if it’s your umbrella i hope you’ll excuse me—i picked it up this morning in a restaurant—if you recognise it as yours, why—i hope you’ll—”
　　“of course it’s mine,” said soapy viciously.
　　the ex-umbrella man retreated. the policeman hurried to assist a tall blonde in an opera cloak across the street in front of a street car that was approaching two blocks away.
　　soapy walked eastward through a street damaged by improvements. he hurled the umbrella wrathfully into an excavation. he muttered against the men who wear helmets and carry clubs. because he wanted to fall into their clutches, they seemed to regard him as a king who could do no wrong.
　　at length soapy reached one of the avenues to the east where the glitter and turmoil was but faint. he set his face down this toward madison square, for the homing instinct survives even when the home is a park bench.
　　but on an unusually quiet corner soapy came to a standstill. here was an old church, quaint and rambling and gabled. through one violet-stained window a soft light glowed, where, no doubt, the organist loitered over the keys, making sure of his mastery of the coming sabbath anthem. for there drifted out to soapy’s ears sweet music that caught and held him transfixed against the convolutions of the iron fence.
　　the moon was above, lustrous and serene; vehicles and pedestrains were few; sparrows twittered sleepily in the eaves—for a little while the scene might have been a country churchyard. and the anthem that the organist played cemented soapy to the iron fence, for he had known it well in the days when his life contained such things as mothers and roses and ambitions and friends and immaculate thoughts and collars.
　　the conjunction of soapy’s receptive state of mind and the influences about the old church wrought a sudden and wonderful change in his soul. he viewed with swift horror the pit into which he had tumbled, the degraded days, unworthy desires, dead hopes, wrecked faculties and base motives that made up his existence.
　　and also in a moment his heart responded thrillingly to this novel mood. an instantaneous and strong impulse moved him to battle with his desperate fate. he would pull himself out of the mire; he would make a man of himself again; he would conquer the evil that had taken possession of him. there was time; he was comparatively young yet; he would resurrect his old eager ambitions and pursue them without faltering. those solemn but sweet organ notes had set up a revolution in him. to-morrow he would go into the roaring downtown district and find work. a fur importer had once offered him a place as driver. he would find him to-morrow and ask for the position. he would be somebody in the world. he would—
　　soapy felt a hand laid on his arm. he looked quickly round into the broad face of a policeman.
　　“what are you doin’ here?” asked the officer.
　　“nothing’,” said soapy.
　　“then come along,” said the policeman.
　　“three months on the island,” said the magistrate in the police court the next morning.
　　警察与赞美诗
　　[美国] 欧·亨利
　　躺在麦迪逊广场的长凳上，索比不安稳地辗转反侧。当野天鹅在夜空中引吭高歌时，当缺少海豹皮外套的女人对她们的丈夫变得越来越亲热时，当索比在公园的长凳上辗转反侧时，你就该知道，冬天快要来了。
　　一片枯叶飘落在索比的膝盖上，那是霜冻先生——杰克·弗洛斯特的名片。对麦迪逊广场的常客们，杰克十分地友好，每年冬天来访前，他都事先通知。在十字街头，他把自己的名片交给北风先生——“露天大厦”的守门人，好让大厦里的房客们做好准备。索比逐渐意识到这个事实，那就是，他为自己组织“个人筹备委员会”以抵御即将来临的严寒气候。因此他在长凳上辗转不已。
　　对躲避寒冬，索比的奢望不算太高。他既没考虑去地中海旅游，也没考虑那熏人欲睡的南方天空，更没考虑去维苏威海湾漂游，他想的仅仅是在岛上待上三个月。三个月提供饭吃，提供床睡，又有意气相投的同伴，还能安全地躲过北风之神勃瑞艾斯和巡警。在索比看来，这就足够了。
　　很多年来，热情的布莱克韦尔岛监狱都是索比的冬季寓所。就像比他幸运得多的纽约人，每年冬天都买票去棕榈滩和里维埃拉一样，索比只能为他一年一次的海岛避冬做一些简单的安排。而现在，又到这个时候了。前一晚，他睡在古老广场喷泉旁的长凳上，用了三份星期日的报纸塞在外套下，盖住脚踝和膝盖仍不能抵御严寒。这时，那岛就在他的脑海里及时地涌现出来。索比鄙视那些以慈善为名供应给城里无依靠的人的必需品。在他看来，法律比慈善机关更仁厚。这里有无数机构，无论是市政的，还是慈善机关的，他都可以着手安排，以获取符合简单生活的食宿。但索比生性高傲，慈善机构的施舍对于他来说只是个累赘。尽管不必破费，但从慈善家手里接过的任何好处都必须用精神上的屈辱作为补偿。就像有了恺撒就有了他的布鲁图一样，慈善机构提供一个床位，你就得洗个澡作为代价。每施舍一片面包，你就得交待你的个人隐私。由此看来，当法律的客人还是合算一些。尽管在那里会受到法规的钳制，但对于一位绅士的个人隐私，法律是不会无故粗鲁地干涉的。
 



第48章 警察与赞美诗欧·亨利 (4)


　　已经决定去岛上了。于是，索比立即开始着手实现他的愿望。做到这一点有很多简单的办法。最称心的就是到某家豪华餐馆去海吃一顿，酒足饭饱后宣布自己无力支付，那样就会被一声不响地交给警察。而乐于助人的法官自会来处理余下的事情。
　　索比离开他的长凳，踱步走出广场，穿过平坦的柏油马路，来到百老汇大街和第五大街的会合处。在那里，他转身面向百老汇大街，站在一家灯火通明的餐馆前，那里每晚都聚集着上等的葡萄酒、绫罗绸缎的服装和上流的精英人物。
　　索比对自己的上半身还颇具信心。他剃过胡子，上衣也还体面，黑色活结领带也算整洁，那还是感恩节时一位教会女士送给他的。要是他能混到餐馆的桌边而不引起别人的怀疑，那他就成功在握了。他露在桌面的上半身是不会引起侍者的怀疑的。来只烤野鸭，索比估量着要点的东西——还来一瓶法国夏布利的白葡萄酒、卡门贝的乳酪、一小杯清咖啡，再加支雪茄烟。雪茄烟一块钱一支的就行。餐费的总数不能太高，以免使餐馆老板产生疯狂的报复。但野鸭肉又能填饱他的肚子，使他能愉快地开始冬季避难所的行程。
　　但他一条腿才跨进餐馆门，领班侍者的双眼便落在了他磨破的裤子和破旧的皮鞋上。一双强劲的手将他兜了个圈儿，安静而干脆地把他赶到人行道上，从而改变了那只受威胁的野鸭的不幸命运。
　　索比离开了百老汇大街。看来，靠享受美食来实现他那令人向往的岛上之路似乎是行不通的，去监狱还得另想其他办法。
　　第六大道的拐角处，一家店铺的平板玻璃橱窗里，商品摆设巧妙，在霓虹灯的映衬下非常耀眼。索比捡起一块石头，砸碎了玻璃窗。在一个警察的领头下，人们纷纷向拐角处跑来。索比双手插在衣袋里，一动不动地站在那儿，一看到警察服装上的黄铜纽扣就面露微笑。
　　“那搞破坏的家伙上哪儿去了？”警官怒气冲冲地问。
　　“你难道不觉得我可能和这件事有点关系吗？”索比讽刺地说。但他态度和气，就像交上了好运的人。
　　那警察甚至拒绝把索比当作一条线索。砸窗的人绝不会等在案发现场和法律的爪牙谈判，他们一定早溜了。事发地的半条街外，警察看见有个人正跑着赶车，便抽出警棍追赶过去。尽管满肚子不快，索比还是重新游荡起来。第二次又失败了。
　　街对面有家装修得不那么豪华的餐馆，它迎合那种食量大而钱包瘪的顾客。这里的碗碟和氛围都很浑重，而汤水和餐巾都很稀薄。索比走进馆子，他那该死的鞋子和无法掩饰的裤子没有受到丝毫挑战。他坐下来吃完牛排、薄煎饼、炸圈饼和馅饼，然后向侍者道出实情，说自己一个钱也没有。
　　“现在，赶紧去叫个警察来吧，”索比说，“可别让大爷我久等。”
　　“你不用找警察，”侍者说道，他的声音像奶油蛋糕似的，他的眼睛就像曼哈顿鸡尾酒会里的樱桃，“喂，伙计！”
　　两个侍者拎起索比扔出门外。索比左耳着地，摔在粗糙坚硬的人行道上。像木匠打开折尺一样，索比一个关节一个关节地从地上撑起来，随后拍净身上的尘土。被捕看来仅是个玫瑰色的梦，那座岛似乎太远了。两个门面外，一个站在药店前的警察看到这个情景，大笑着走开了。
　　索比一直走过五个街区，才重新鼓起勇气寻求被捕。这次机会很好，他自以为是瓮中捉鳖。一位服饰简朴得体的年轻女子正站在橱窗前，颇有兴致地瞧着里面修面用的水杯和墨水瓶。一位身材魁梧、态度严峻的警察正靠在离橱窗两码之外的消火栓上。
　　索比决计扮演一个卑鄙下流的调情者。他猎取的对象外表雅静而娴淑，附近又有一位忠于职守的警察。这令他足以相信，他很快就能感受到被警察抓住胳膊的愉快滋味了，就能确保在那舒服安稳的小岛上过冬了。
　　索比将那修女送的活结领带整理了一下，拉出缩到里头的衣服袖口，把帽子拉得歪歪扭扭，侧着身向那位年轻女子靠过去。他向她挤眉弄眼，猛地咳嗽几声并清清嗓子，嬉皮笑脸地摆出一副调情者厚颜无耻的丑态来。凭借眼角的余光，索比瞥见那位警察正死死地盯着他。那位年轻女子挪开了几步，仍专心致志地瞧着那些修面用的杯子。索比紧跟过去，大胆地走到她的旁边，举起帽子说：
　　“啊哈，贝德丽雅！要不要去我家玩玩？”
　　警察仍然看着，那被纠缠的年轻女子只要伸伸手指，索比就可以踏进他岛上的天堂了。他已经在想象中感觉到了警察局里的舒适温暖。那位女子朝着他伸出手来，抓住了索比的衣袖。
　　“当然，迈克，”她高兴地回答，“只要你肯给我买杯啤酒。要不是那位警察紧盯着，我早就和你打招呼了。”
　　就像常春藤缠绕着橡树一样，那位年轻女子缠住了他。索比带着满心的沮丧。从警察身边走过，他仿佛注定要享受自由。
　　在下一个拐弯处，他甩了那位女伴跑开了。跑到一个夜里有着最明亮的街道、最愉快的心情、最轻率的誓言和最轻快的歌剧的地方，索比停住了。在这寒冷的冬夜里，穿裘皮大衣的女人和披大礼服的男人愉悦地散着步。一阵突然的恐惧袭向索比，或许某种可怕的法术总能使他免于被捕，这个念头使他感到一阵恐慌。然而，当他看到又一个警察趾高气扬地在一家灯火辉煌的剧院门前踱着步子时，他便立即抓住了“扰乱治安”这根稻草。
　　索比开始像醉鬼一样，在人行道上扯开破嗓子乱叫起来。他手舞足蹈，高声嚎叫，胡言乱语，简直闹翻了天。
　　警察挥舞着他的警棍，转过身背对着索比，向一位市民解释道：
　　“这个耶鲁大学的家伙，在庆祝他们给哈特福德学院吃了个大鸭蛋，是吵了点，但没什么危害。我们接到命令，不准干涉。”
　　索比闷闷不乐地停止了他那丝毫无用的叫嚷。难道真没警察逮捕他吗？在他的想象中，那岛看起来成了可望而不可及的阿卡狄亚。他把单薄的上衣扣紧以抵御那刺骨的寒风。
　　索比看到一家雪茄烟店里，一位衣着得体的男人正对着闪烁的火光点烟，他的丝绸伞靠在店门口。索比走进去，拿起那把伞，然后不紧不慢地走了出来。点烟的人赶紧跟了过来。
　　“我的伞！”他厉声喝道。
　　“哦，是吗？”索比冷笑着说，再加一条侮辱罪在盗窃罪上吧，“好哇，你为什么不叫警察呢？你的伞是我拿了！你为什么不叫警察呢？那儿就站着一个，在拐弯处。”
　　伞的主人慢下了脚步，一种幸运将再次从他的身旁溜走的不祥预感使索比也慢了下来。那位警察好奇地看着他俩。
　　“当然，”伞的主人说，“这是——唔，你知道是怎样发生这种误会的。我——要是伞是你的，我希望你能原谅我——今天早上我在一家餐馆里捡到它的——要是你认出它就是你的，为什么——我希望你会——”
　　“它当然是我的。”索比恶狠狠地说。
　　伞的前主人退缩了。那警察急忙跑去搀扶一位身着晚礼服斗篷的高个子金发女郎穿过马路，因为有辆车要从两街段远的地方开过来了。
　　索比穿过一条因翻修而弄得坑坑洼洼的街道，向东走去。他气冲冲地把伞扔进坑里，小声地抱怨那些戴着头盔、舞动着警棍的家伙。因为他一心想被捕入狱，可他们似乎把他当成了永不犯错的国王。
　　最后，索比到达了一条通往东边的大街，那里的灯光和嘈杂声都很微弱。想家的本能复苏了，尽管这家仅是公园里的一条长凳，索比还是朝着麦迪逊广场的方向走去。
　　来到一个异常安静的角落，索比静静地站住了。这儿有一座样式别致、布局零乱却有山形墙的古老教堂。透过紫罗兰色的玻璃窗，一丝淡淡的灯光映射出来。安息日就要到了，毋庸质疑，那是风琴师在键盘上练习赞美诗。美妙的乐声传出来，飘进了索比的耳朵，紧紧地摄住了他，使他依靠在螺旋形的铁栏杆上听呆了。
　　高空皎洁而安宁的月亮，稀稀疏疏的车辆和行人，睡眼朦胧的麻雀正在屋檐上啾鸣着——这情景很快就使他想起了乡村的墓地。索比被风琴师弹奏的赞美诗吸引在铁栏杆上，因为，他曾非常熟悉这个旋律，那时，母爱、玫瑰、志向、朋友以及纯洁的思想和得体的衣着还充满了他的生活。
　　这时，索比多愁善感的情绪和这座古老教堂的影响融合在一起，在他灵魂里产生了一种奇迹般的变化。对那颓唐的日子、耻辱的欲望、破毁的愿望、受损的才能以及存活下来的卑鄙动机，他立刻深恶痛绝起来。
　　很快，他的内心就因这种新的精神状态而激动万分，在一种激烈冲动的迫使下，他迫不及待地要和厄运抗争。他要从泥泞中把自己拔出，他要洗心革面，他要战胜那曾挟制了自己的罪恶。还有时间，他仍年轻，他要使原来的壮志雄心复苏，并勇往直前去追求它。在他的心里，那圣洁而甘甜的音乐已经掀起了一场革命。明天，他就直接去热闹的商业区找工作。一个毛皮进口商曾提供给他一份赶车的活儿，明天他就去找他，要求做这份工作，他要成为世上堂堂正正的人，他要——
　　索比感觉到他的胳膊上落下一只手。他立即回头，看见了警察的一张宽脸盘。
　　“你在这儿干什么？”警察问道。
　　“没干什么。”索比回答。
　　“那跟我来。”警察说。
　　“到岛上去关三个月。”第二天一早，警厅的长官说。




第49章 在树林里居伊·德·莫泊桑 (1)


　　in the wood
　　as the mayor was about to sit down to breakfast, word was brought to him that the rural policeman, with two prisoners, was awaiting him at the hotel de ville.  he went there at once and found old hochedur standing guard before a middle-class couple whom he was regarding with a severe expression on his face.
　　the man, a fat old fellow with a red nose and white hair, seemed utterly dejected; while the woman, a little roundabout individual with shining cheeks, looked at the official who had arrested them, with defiant eyes.
　　“what is it？ what is it, hochedur？”
　　the rural policeman made his deposition.
　　he had gone out that morning at his usual time, in order to patrol his beat from the forest of champioux as far as the boundaries of argenteuil. he had not noticed anything unusual in the country except that it was a fine day, and that the wheat was doing well, when the son of old bredel, who was going over his vines, called out to him:
　　“here, daddy hochedur, go and have a look at the outskirts of the wood. in the first thicket you will find a pair of pigeons who must be a hundred and thirty years old between them!”
　　he went in the direction indicated, entered the thicket, and there he heard words which made him suspect a flagrant1 breach of morality. advancing, therefore, on his hands and knees as if to surprise a poacher, he had arrested the couple whom he found there.
　　the mayor looked at the culprits in astonishment, for the man was certainly sixty, and the woman fifty-five at least, and he began to question them, beginning with the man, who replied in such a weak voice that he could scarcely be heard.
　　“what is your name？”
　　“nicholas beaurain.”
　　“your occupation？”
　　“haberdasher, in the rue des martyrs, in paris.”
　　“what were you doing in the wood？”
　　the haberdasher remained silent, with his eyes on his fat paunch2, and his hands hanging at his sides, and the mayor continued:
　　“do you deny what the officer of the municipal authorities states？”
　　“no, monsieur.”
　　“so you confess it？”
　　“yes, monsieur.”
　　“what have you to say in your defence？”
　　“nothing, monsieur.”
　　“where did you meet the partner in your misdemeanor？”
　　“she is my wife, monsieur.”
　　“your wife？”
　　“yes, monsieur.”
　　“then—then—you do not live together-in paris？”
　　“i beg your pardon, monsieur, but we are living together!”
　　“but in that case—you must be mad, altogether mad, my dear sir, to get caught playing lovers in the country at ten o’clock in the morning.”
　　the haberdasher seemed ready to cry with shame, and he muttered: “it was she who enticed me! i told her it was very stupid, but when a woman once gets a thing into her head—you know—you cannot get it out.”
　　the mayor, who liked a joke, smiled and replied: “in your case, the contrary ought to have happened. you would not be here, if she had had the idea only in her head.”
　　then monsieur beauain was seized with rage and turning to his wife, he said: “do you see to what you have brought us with your poetry？ and now we shall have to go before the courts at our age, for a breach of morals! and we shall have to shut up the shop, sell our good will, and go to some other neighborhood! that’s what it has come to.”
　　madame beaurain got up, and without looking at her husband, she explained herself without embarrassment, without useless modesty, and almost without hesitation.
　　“of course, monsieur, i know that we have made ourselves ridiculous. will you allow me to plead my cause like an advocate, or rather like a poor woman？ and i hope that you will be kind enough to send us home, and to spare us the disgrace of a prosecution.
　　“years ago, when i was young, i made monsieur beaurain’s acquaintance one sunday in this neighborhood. he was employed in a draper’s shop, and i was a saleswoman in a ready-made clothing establishment. i remember it as if it were yesterday. i used to come and spend sundays here occasionally with a friend of mine, rose leveque, with whom i lived in the rue pigalle, and rose had a sweetheart, while i had none. he used to bring us here, and one saturday he told me laughing that he should bring a friend with him the next day. i quite understood what he meant, but i replied that it would be no good; for i was virtuous, monsieur.
www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ



第50章 在树林里居伊·德·莫泊桑 (2)


　　“the next day we met monsieur beaurain at the railway station, and in those days he was good-looking, but i had made up my mind not to encourage him, and i did not. well, we arrived at bezons. it was a lovely day, the sort of day that touches your heart. when it is fine even now, just as it used to be formerly, i grow quite foolish, and when i am in the country i utterly lose my head. the green grass, the swallows flying so swiftly, the smell of the grass, the scarlet poppies, the daisies, all that makes me crazy. it is like champagne when one is not accustomed to it!
　　“well, it was lovely weather, warm and bright, and it seemed to penetrate your body through your eyes when you looked and through your mouth when you breathed. rose and simon hugged3 and kissed each other every minute, and that gave me a queer feeling! monsieur beaurain and i walked behind them, without speaking much, for when people do not know each other, they do not find anything to talk about. he looked timid, and i liked to see his embarrassment. at last we got to the little wood; it was as cool as in a bath there, and we four sat down. rose and her lover teased me because i looked rather stern, but you will understand that i could not be otherwise. and then they began to kiss and hug again, without putting any more restraint upon themselves than if we had not been there; and then they whispered together, and got up and went off among the trees, without saying a word. you may fancy what i looked like, alone with this young fellow whom i saw for the first time. i felt so confused at seeing them go that it gave me courage, and i began to talk. i asked him what his business was, and he said he was a linen draper’s assistant, as i told you just now. we talked for a few minutes, and that made him bold, and he wanted to take liberties with me, but i told him sharply to keep his place. is not that true, monsieur beaurain？”
　　monsieur beaurain, who was looking at his feet in confusion, did not reply, and she continued: “then he saw that i was virtuous, and he began to make love to me nicely, like an honorable man, and from that time he came every sunday, for he was very much in love with me. i was very fond of him also, very fond of him! he was a good-looking fellow, formerly, and in short he married me the next september, and we started in business in the rue des martyrs.
　　“it was a hard struggle for some years, monsieur. business did not prosper, and we could not afford many country excursions, and, besides, we had got out of the way of them. one has other things in one’s head, and thinks more of the cash box than of pretty speeches, when one is in business. we were growing old by degrees without perceiving it, like quiet people who do not think much about love. one does not regret anything as long as one does not notice what one has lost.
　　“and then, monsieur, business became better, and we were tranquil as to the future! then, you see, i do not exactly know what went on in my mind, no, i really do not know, but i began to dream like a little boarding-school girl. the sight of the little carts full of flowers which are drawn about the streets made me cry; the smell of violets sought me out in my easy-chair, behind my cash box, and made my heart beat! then i would get up and go out on the doorstep to look at the blue sky between the roofs. when one looks up at the sky from the street, it looks like a river which is descending on paris, winding as it flows, and the swallows pass to and fro in it like fish. these ideas are very stupid at my age! but how can one help it, monsieur, when one has worked all one’s life？ a moment comes in which one perceives that one could have done something else, and that one regrets, oh! yes, one feels intense regret! just think, for twenty years i might have gone and had kisses in the woods, like other women. i used to think how delightful it would be to lie under the trees and be in love with some one! and i thought of it every day and every night! i dreamed of the moonlight on the water, until i felt inclined to drown myself.
　　“i did not venture to speak to monsieur beaurain about this at first. i knew that he would make fun of me, and send me back to sell my needles and cotton! and then, to speak the truth, monsieur beaurain never said much to me, but when i looked in the glass, i also understood quite well that i no longer appealed to any one!
　　“well, i made up my mind, and i proposed to him an excursion into the country, to the place where we had first become acquainted. he agreed without mistrusting anything, and we arrived here this morning, about nine o’clock.
  



第51章 在树林里居伊·德·莫泊桑 (3)


　　“i felt quite young again when i got among the wheat, for a woman’s heart never grows old! and really, i no longer saw my husband as he is at present, but just as he was formerly! that i will swear to you, monsieur. as true as i am standing here i was crazy. i began to kiss him, and he was more surprised than if i had tried to murder him. he kept saying to me: why, you must be mad! you are mad this morning! what is the matter with you？’i did not listen to him, i only listened to my own heart, and i made him come into the wood with me. that is all. i have spoken the truth, monsieur le maire, the whole truth.”
　　the mayor was a sensible man. he rose from his chair, smiled, and said: “go in peace, madame, and when you again visit our forests, be more discreet.”
　　在树林里
　　[法国] 居伊·德·莫泊桑
　　居伊·德·莫泊桑（1850-1893），19世纪末法国著名小说家，生于法国诺曼底一个没落贵族家庭。他曾参加普法战争，体验了军队生活，也激发了他的爱国热情，这在他的第一篇成名作《羊脂球》中有所反映。莫泊桑富于创造性，描绘真切，笔法灵活多样；富有情趣，讽刺深刻，幽默生动；结构严谨，语言优美。代表作有《俊友》《她的一生》等。
　　居伊·德·莫泊桑（guy de maupassant，1850 —1893），19世纪末法国著名小说家，生于法国诺曼底一个没落贵族家庭。他曾参加普法战争，在他的成名作《羊脂球》中反映了他的爱国热情。莫泊桑富于创造性，描绘真切，笔法灵活多样；富有情趣，讽刺深刻，幽默生动；结构严谨，语言优美。代表作有《俊友》《她的一生》等。
　　村长正要坐下来吃早餐，突然有人来，打断了这顿早餐，说是乡村巡查员抓到两个可疑的人，正在办公室里等着他去判决。村长立刻赶往那里，看见巡查员霍希多尔老人表情严肃地站在大门前，而他的面前，则站着一对中产阶级男女。
　　那个男的是一个红鼻子、白头发的胖老头，看起来非常沮丧。而相反的是，那个女的容光焕发，并用一种蔑视的目光注视着抓捕她的警察。
　　“这是怎么回事，霍希多尔，说说发生了什么事情？”
　　这个乡村警察将事情讲叙了一遍。
　　今天早晨，他像往常一样从康比西斯树林到阿金迪尔的边界上巡逻。放眼望去，真是一个美好的天气，灿烂的阳光照耀在这片碧绿的田野上，小麦在快乐地成长，四周没有任何异常情况。这时，正在整理枝藤的年轻人布雷德尔向他喊道：
　　“这里，霍希多尔爷爷，过来看看这个树林！在第一个灌木丛里，你会发现一对调情的鸽子，但是，他们的年龄加起来一定有130多岁了！”
　　他顺着年轻人所指的方向走去，并钻进浓密的树丛里。这时，他就听到一对男女的说话声和喘息声。这让他马上想到一对伤风败俗的狗男女。于是，他趴在地上，就像一位出人意料的潜入者，慢慢地向声响的方向移动。最终，当场抓住了这对偷情的男女。
　　村长非常惊讶地打量着这对疑犯。因为那个男的看上去应该有60多岁了，而那个女的至少也有55岁了。然后，他开始先审问那个男的，而那极其微弱的答话小得几乎听不清楚。
　　“姓名？”
　　“尼古拉斯·博文。”
　　“职业？”
　　“小商人，在巴黎的烈士街。”
　　“你们在树林里干什么？”
　　小商人沉默了，两眼紧盯着他那肥肥的圆肚皮，两只手垂放在两侧。村长继续问道：
　　“你对乡政府乡村巡查员所说的情况有什么异议吗？”
　　“没有，长官。”
　　“那么，你承认这一切？”
　　“是的，长官。”
　　“你还有什么需要辩护的吗？”
　　“没有，长官。”
　　“那你在哪里遇见你的同伙的？”
　　“长官，她是我的妻子。”
　　“你的妻子？”
　　“是的，长官。”
　　“那么……那么，你们不是一起住在巴黎吗？”
　　“长官，我请求您的宽恕，但我们一直都住在一起。”
　　“不过，如果真的如你们所说，你一定疯了，你们都疯了，我亲爱的先生。上午10点来到这个长满杂草的树林里，做出那种事情，还被当场发现！”
　　小商人羞愧得眼泪都要流出来了，用极低微的声音说道：“是她怂恿我的！而且，我也告诉过她这是一件丢人而又愚蠢的事，但是，你也明白，当一个女人决定要做某件事情时，你是无法阻拦的！”
　　村长面带笑容，揶揄着回答道：“可是，这件事情你也有责任，如果你能做到拒绝她，就不会有这些事情发生了。如果你坚持自己的意见，只让这些想法留在脑子里，现在你就不会被拘押在这里了，不是吗？”
　　村长的一席话激起了博文先生的怒气，他转向他的妻子斥责道：“你不是说要把我们带到一个诗情画意的地方吗？现在却面临这种尴尬的境地！像我们这个年纪的人，还要因为伤风败俗去面对法庭的审问！如果是这样的结果，商店就不得不关闭，我们又该怎么面对街坊邻居，原来的地方就无法待下去了，后果很可能是这样。”
　　博文太太站起来，正眼都不看她的丈夫，镇定从容，没有一点的羞愧和不安，她毫不犹豫地解释道：
　　“村长先生，当然，我知道我们所做的事情是多么荒谬、多么可笑。但是，请允许我像律师那样，或者更恰当地说，是为一位可怜的女人进行自我辩护。在听完我的故事后，希望你能大发善心，让我们回家，并赦免对我们这种不光彩事情的起诉。
　　“许多年前，当还是少女的时候，我与博文先生在一个星期天，而且就在这个村庄里认识的。当时，他在一家服装店当伙计，我在一家服装店当营业员。到现在，这些事情还清楚地印在我的脑海里，就像昨天才刚刚发生的那样。过去，每个星期天我基本上都与一个名叫露丝·雷维克的女友来这里玩。我和她都住在比加香街。露丝有一个非常帅气的男朋友，但我没有。他经常带我们来这里玩。一个周末，露丝的男友笑着对我说，下次他要带一个朋友来。我十分了解话语中隐含的意思。我装出一种毫不在乎的态度回答：没有必要，我可以照顾自己的。’先生，说这些话，只是因为我还是比较保守。
　　“不久，我们在火车上遇见了博文先生。那时的他是个非常帅气小伙子。但是，我没有因此而迁就他，而且之后也没有迁就过他。随后，我们来到贝松。那天天气特别好，是一种让你心旷神怡的天气，就和现在的天气一样好。正是因为今天和那天一样，我才会变得如此愚蠢。当我来到这片美丽的大自然中，就迷失自我，绿油油的小草，轻快飞越的燕子，到处散发着青草、罂粟花、白菊花的气息。这一切都让我着迷、疯狂！就像是一位滴酒不沾的姑娘，突然喝下了整瓶的香槟。
　　“天气真的太好了，风和日丽，晴空万里。当两人看着对方时，好像可以看透对方的一切，甚至呼吸一下，就可以看见你的心房。每隔几分钟，露丝和西蒙就要亲吻一下，这让我感觉怪异。博文先生和我就在他们的背后坐着，因为彼此都不了解，没有什么话题可聊。他们也找不到适合的话题。他看起来比较拘谨，而我正喜欢看他尴尬的表情，非常有趣。最后，我们来到一片小树林里，一种凉爽的感觉笼罩全身，就像冲凉一样。我们四个人坐在草地上。露丝和西蒙取笑我，因为我的表情相当严肃。但是，你要理解我不可能像他们俩那样。然后，他们又开始接吻、拥抱，将我们两个人当作透明人一般，毫无顾虑。最后，他们站起来，没留一句话，就到树林中去了。设想一下我当时要面临的情形，单独与一个第一次见面的男青年在一起。他们离开后，我有点不知所措，可是这让我有勇气和他讲话。我问了他的工作，和我前面提及的一样，他是个小店铺的伙计。我们就这样闲聊了几分钟，然而，这反而让他的胆子更大了，竟然将我当成随便的人。我非常严肃地告诉他，于是回到了自己原来的位置。博文先生，我所说的都是真的吧？”
　　有些迷糊的博文先生一直盯着自己的脚尖，默不作答。她继续说道：“这时，他发现我是一个自重的女孩，便以令人尊重的方式追求我。从那天起，每逢星期天他就会过来，因为他已经陷入爱的泥潭中，无法自拔，而我也深深爱上了他。说实话，当时他的确拥有令人着迷的面孔。简而言之，第二年的９月，我们就结婚了。婚后，我们在烈士街上开了一家店铺。
　　“前些年，我们的日子过得非常艰辛，生意不景气，我们也无法支付郊游的费用。就这样，我们也慢慢地没有了那份激情，头脑中被各种事情塞得满满的，思考的第一件事情就是钱柜，而不是甜言蜜语。不知不觉，我们老了，成了循规蹈矩的人，也不去思考什么是爱情。只要感觉不到有什么丢失或缺少，我们就不会去想。
　　“先生，现在，我们的生意越来越好了，平静地面对未来。之后，我也不确定为什么脑子里会有这样的想法，应该说，我是完全不知道为什么，我开始怀念少女时代的梦想了。只要一看见大街上载满鲜花的小卡车，我就会泪流满面。当我坐在账台背后的圈手椅上，紫罗兰的芬芳让我的心怦怦乱跳。接着，我慢慢站起来，走到门前，瞭望着屋脊间蔚蓝的天空。当在街心观看天空时，天空宛如一条河流，蜿蜒地流经巴黎。空中的燕子就像河里游来游去的鱼。当然，我也知道这个年龄的人有这样的遐想是一件多么可笑的事情！但是，先生，当一个已经工作一生的人，该怎样抑制这样的渴望呢？有时还会感觉有其他的事情可以做，然而，我也会想起一些令人后悔的事情，想一想，我原本可以和其他女人一样，来到这个树林里，并与爱人亲吻。我过去经常幻想和爱人躺在着绿树丛林中恋爱，这是一件多么浪漫、多么美妙的事情啊！而且，不论是白天还是晚上，我一直遐想。我还梦想着水面上的月光，甚至想跳下去淹死自己。
　　“最初，我还不敢对博文先生吐露这些想法。我知道他会取笑我，并且会劝我静下心来去推销线团和缝衣针。另外，说实话，对我而言，博文先生的魅力远不如前，不过，当我看到镜子中自己时，也非常清楚，自己不再是那个令众人着迷的少女了。
　　“最终，我下定决心，提出到我们第一次相识的树林郊游。他也毫不犹豫地同意了。今天早上，我们大约9点来到这里。
　　“当我穿越一望无垠的麦田时，我感觉自己再次回到了年轻的时候，因为女人的心是从来不会变老的。实际上，我向你发誓，先生，当我站在那里时，我感觉身边的丈夫突然变回当年那个英俊倜傥的小伙子，这真让我着迷。我开始疯狂地亲吻他。他却感到极为震惊，仿佛我要杀了他似的。他不停地说道：你疯了！你怎么大清早就发疯了！发生什么事呢？’这些话我一句也没听进去，而只听心里的话。然后，我将他拖进树林里，亲热起来。事情就是这样，亲爱的村长先生，每一句话都是实话。”
　　村长也是个通情达理的人，他站起来，友善地说道：“你们安心回巴黎吧，太太！可是，下次你们拜访这个树林时，可要谨慎些，找个更隐蔽的地方……”
www.ｌzuoＷＥＮ．ＣＯＭ



第52章 修软垫椅的女人 居伊·德·莫泊桑 (1)


　　lasting love
　　it was the end of the dinner that opened the shooting season. the marquis de bertrans with his guests sat around a brightly lighted table, covered with fruit and flowers.
　　the conversation drifted to love. immediately there arose an animated discussion, the same eternal discussion as to whether it were possible to love more than once. examples were given of persons who had loved once; these were offset by those who had loved violently many times. the men agreed that passion, like sickness, may attack the same person several times, unless it strikes to kill. this conclusion seemed quite incontestable. the women, however, who based their opinion on poetry rather than on practical observation, maintained that love, the great passion, may come only once to mortals. it resembles lightning, they said, this love. a heart once touched by it becomes forever such a waste, so ruined, so consumed, that no other strong sentiment can take root there, not even a dream.
　　the marquis, who had indulged in many love affairs, disputed this belief.
　　“i tell you it is possible to love several times with all one’s heart and soul. you quote examples of persons who have killed themselves for love, to prove the impossibility of a second passion. i wager that if they had not foolishly committed suicide, and so destroyed the possibility of a second experience, they would have found a new love, and still another, and so on till death. it is with love as with drink. he who has once indulged is forever a slave. it is a thing of temperament.”
　　they chose the old doctor as umpire. he thought it was as the marquis had said, a thing of temperament.
　　“as for me,” he said, “i once knew of a love which lasted fifty-five years without one day’s respite, and which ended only with death.” the wife of the marquis1 clasped her hands.
　　“that is beautiful! ah, what a dream to be loved in such a way! what bliss to live for fifty-five years enveloped in an intense, unwavering affection!how this happy being must have blessed his life to be so adored!”
　　the doctor smiled.
　　“you are not mistaken, madame, on this point the loved one was a man. you even know him; it is monsieur chouquet, the chemist. as to the woman, you also know her, the old chair-mender, who came every year to the chateau.”
　　the enthusiasm of the women fell. some expressed their contempt with “pouah!” for the loves of common people did not interest them.
　　the doctor continued: “three months ago i was called to the deathbed of the old chair-mender. the priest had preceded me. she wished to make us the executors of her will. in order that we might understand her conduct, she told us the story of her life. it is most singular and touching:
　　“her father and mother were both chair-menders. she had never lived in a house. as a little child she wandered about with them, dirty, unkempt, hungry. they visited many towns, leaving their horse, wagon and dog just outside the limits, where the child played in the grass alone until her parents had repaired all the broken chairs in the place. they seldom spoke, except to cry, chairs! chairs! chair-mender!’when the little one strayed too far away, she would be called back by the harsh, angry voice of her father. she never heard a word of affection.
　　“when she grew older, she fetched and carried the broken chairs. then it was she made friends with the children in the street, but their parents always called them away and scolded them for speaking to the barefooted child. often the boys threw stones at her. once a kind woman gave her a few pennies. she saved them most carefully.
　　“one day—she was then eleven years old—as she was walking through a country town she met, behind the cemetery, little chouquet, weeping bitterly, because one of his playmates had stolen two precious liards (mills). the tears of the small bourgeois, one of those much-envied mortals, who, she imagined, never knew trouble, completely upset her. she approached him and, as soon as she learned the cause of his grief, she put into his hands all her savings. he took them without hesitation and dried his eyes. wild with joy, she kissed him. he was busy counting his money, and did not object. seeing that she was not repulsed, she threw her arms round him and gave him a hug—then she ran away.
　　“what was going on in her poor little head？ was it because she had sacrificed all her fortune that she became madly fond of this youngster, or was it because she had given him the first tender kiss？ the mystery is alike for children and for those of riper years.
　　“for months she dreamed of that corner near the cemetery and of the little chap. she stole a sou here and, there from her parents on the chair money or groceries she was sent to buy. when she returned to the spot near the cemetery she had two francs in her pocket, but he was not there. passing his father’s drug store, she caught sight of him behind the counter. he was sitting between a large red globe and a blue one. she only loved him the more, quite carried away at the sight of the brilliant-colored globes. she cherished the recollection of it forever in her heart.
下{书}网



第53章 修软垫椅的女人 居伊·德·莫泊桑 (2)


　　“the following year she met him near the school. playing marbles. she rushed up to him, threw her arms round him, and kissed him so passionately that he screamed, in fear. to quiet him, she gave him all her money. three francs and twenty centimes!a real gold mine, at which he gazed with staring eyes.
　　“after this he allowed her to kiss him as much as she wished.
　　“during the next four years she put into his hands all her savings, which he pocketed conscientiously in exchange for kisses. at one time it was thirty sons, at another two francs. again, she only had twelve sous. she wept with grief and shame, explaining brokenly that it had been a poor year. the next time she brought five francs, in one whole piece, which made her laugh with joy.
　　“she no longer thought of any one but the boy, and he watched for her with impatience; sometimes he would run to meet her. this made her heart thump with joy.
　　“suddenly he disappeared. he had gone to boarding school. she found this out by careful investigation. then she used great diplomacy to persuade her parents to change their route and pass by this way again during vacation. after a year of scheming she succeeded. she had not seen him for two years, and scarcely recognized him, he was so changed, had grown taller, better looking and was imposing in his uniform, with its brass buttons. he pretended not to see her, and passed by without a glance.
　　“she wept for two days and from that time loved and suffered unceasingly.
　　“every year he came home and she passed him, not daring to lift her eyes. he never condescended2 to turn his head toward her. she loved him madly, hopelessly. she said to me:he is the only man whom i have ever seen. i don’t even know if another exists.’
　　“her parents died. she continued their work.
　　“one day, on entering the village, where her heart always remained, she saw chouquet coming out of his pharmacy with a young lady leaning on his arm. she was his wife.
　　“that night the chairmender threw herself into the river. a drunkard passing the spot pulled her out and took her to the drug store. young chouquet came down in his dressing gown to revive her. without seeming to know who she was he undressed her and rubbed her; then he said to her, in a harsh voice: you are mad! people must not do stupid things like that.’
　　“his voice brought her to life again. he had spoken to her! she was happy for a long time. he refused remuneration for his trouble, although she insisted.
　　“all her life passed in this way. she worked, thinking always of him. she began to buy medicines at his pharmacy; this gave her a chance to talk to him and to see him closely. in this way, she was still able to give him money.
　　“as i said before, she died this spring. when she had closed her pathetic story she entreated me to take her earnings to the man she loved. she had worked only that she might leave him something to remind him of her after her death.
　　“i gave the priest fifty francs for her funeral expenses. the next morning i went to see the chouquets. they were finishing breakfast, sitting opposite each other, fat and red, important and self-satisfied.
　　“they welcomed me and offered me some coffee, which i accepted. then i began my story in a trembling voice, sure that they would be softened, even to tears.
　　“as soon as chouquet understood that he had been loved by that vagabond!that chair-mender!that wanderer!’he swore with indignation as though his reputation had been sullied, the respect of decent people lost, his personal honor, something precious and dearer to him than life, gone.
　　“his exasperated wife kept repeating:that beggar!that beggar!’seeming unable to find words suitable to the enormity.
　　“he stood up and began striding about. he muttered:can you understand anything so horrible, doctor？ oh, if i had only known it while she was alive, i should have had her thrown into prison. i promise you she would not have escaped.’
　　“i was dumfounded; i hardly knew what to think or say, but i had to finish my mission. she commissioned me,’i said, to give you her savings, which amount to three thousand five hundred francs. as what i have just told you seems to be very disagreeable, perhaps you would prefer to give this money to the poor.’
　　“they looked at me, that man and woman,’speechless with amazement. i took the few thousand francs from out of my pocket. wretched-looking money from every country. pennies and gold pieces all mixed together. then i asked: what is your decision？’
　　“madame chouquet spoke first. well, since it is the dying woman’s wish, it seems to me impossible to refuse it.’
　　“her husband said, in a shamefaced manner: we could buy something for our children with it.’
　　“i answered dryly: as you wish.’
　　“he replied: well, give it to us anyhow, since she commissioned you to do so; we will find a way to put it to some good purpose.’
　　“i gave them the money, bowed and left.
　　“the next day chouquet came to me and said brusquely:
　　“that woman left her wagon here—what have you done with it？’
　　“nothing; take it if you wish.’
　　“it’s just what i wanted,’he added, and walked off. i called him back and said:
　　“she also left her old horse and two dogs. don’t you need them？’
　　“he stared at me surprised: well, no! really, what would i do with them？’
www.7wenxue.comwww.ｌzuoＷeＮ．ＣＯＭ



第54章 修软垫椅的女人 居伊·德·莫泊桑 (3)


　　“dispose of them as you like.’ he laughed and held out his hand to me. i shook it. what could i do？ the doctor and the druggist in a country village must not be at enmity.
　　“i have kept the dogs. the priest took the old horse. the wagon is useful to chouquet, and with the money he has bought railroad stock.
　　“that is the only deep, sincere love that i have ever known in all my life.”
　　the doctor looked up. the marquise, whose eyes were full of tears, sighed and said:
　　“there is no denying the fact, only women know how to love.”
　　修软椅的女人
　　居伊·德·莫泊桑 \/ guy de maupassant
　　为庆祝狩猎期到来而举行的晚宴即将结束。德·贝特朗侯爵家人和客人们围坐在灯火辉煌的桌子边，桌子上摆满了水果和鲜花。话题偶然涉及到爱情，马上开始了一场激烈的讨论。
　　讨论的话题是那个永恒的老问题：人的一生，真正的爱情能有多次呢？有人举例说，他们只爱过一次；另外一些人则说，他们爱过很多次，而且每一次都很疯狂。并且，男人都认为狂热的爱情像疾病，会多次袭击同一个人，甚至会要了他的命。这种结论似乎无可置疑，然而，女人们却有着她们的看法。她们的爱情观是在诗情画意的基础上，而非实践观察的结果。所以她们认为，爱情是一场巨大的狂热，对凡人来说，一生只会发生一次。他们还说，爱情就像霹雳，一旦人心被射中，就会永久变成荒野，满目疮痍，一片废墟。纵然还有其他的激情，但即使充满梦幻，这片荒野都不可能生根发芽。
　　侯爵曾多次恋爱，所以为他的观点辩解。
　　“告诉你们吧，多次全心全意地去爱是可能的。你们刚才举的例子是为爱而死的人，以此证明发生第二次爱是不可能的。可是，我要告诉你们：如果这些人不是愚蠢的自杀，失去第二次恋爱机会的话，他们会发生一次全新的恋爱，而且还会继续去爱，一爱再爱，直到死去。恋爱就像酗酒，一旦饮下去，就会再喝，恋爱也是如此。这是个气质的问题。”
　　大家选择老医生做仲裁人。他的看法和公爵的看法如出一辙，认为这是一个气质的问题。
　　“至于我，”他说，“我曾经听说一桩持续了五十五年的疯狂爱情，一天都没有间断过，直到死了才结束。”侯爵夫人不禁鼓起掌来。
　　“那真是太美妙了！哦，就这样被人爱着，真是像梦一样迷人啊！五十五年，在这种热烈、坚定的爱情中生活，是多么幸福的一件事啊！被这样的男人热恋着，是何等幸福、何等羡慕的人生啊！”
　　医生微微一笑。
　　“夫人，您一点儿都没弄错，在这里，被爱的是一个男人。您知道这个人，他是镇上那个药剂师，舒凯先生。至于那个女的，您也知道，就是那个修软垫椅的那个老妇人，她每年都会来府上的。”
　　女人们的热情顿时一落千丈。有人发出“呸”的声音，表达他们的蔑视，因为这种卑贱人的爱情提不起他们的兴趣。
　　医生继续说道：“三个月前，有人把我叫到这位临终老妇人的床边。我到的时候，牧师已经到了。她希望我们做她的遗嘱执行人。为了让我们清楚她这个举动，她把她一生的故事都告诉我们了。她的故事是我听过的最非凡、最感人的故事。
　　“她的父母都是修软垫椅的。她从来没有固定在一个地方居住过。她小的时候，就跟随父母四处流浪，脏兮兮、乱蓬蓬的，还常常忍饥挨饿。他们来过很多城镇。每到一个城镇，他们就停下来，卸下马，让狗趴在外面。她的父母在那里把全村的旧椅子修完，小女孩就一个人在草地上玩耍。他们很少开口讲话，除了开口吆喝那句椅子，椅子，修——椅——子’，才不得不说上几句话。当小女孩晃荡得太远的时候，她的父亲就用刺耳的、怒气冲冲的声音把她喊回来。她从未听到过一句充满温情的话。
　　“她稍大一点的时候，就到镇上收集旧椅子。于是，她和街道上的几个孩子结识，成为朋友。但是，她朋友的父母们总是把他们叫回去，还责备他们不要和光着脚的孩子说话。那些男孩子常常朝她的身上扔石子。有的时候，一些好心的太太给她几个便士，她非常小心、非常谨慎地把它们攒起来。
　　“在她十一岁的一天，当她路过她以前经过的一个乡镇的时候，在公墓后面，她看见小舒凯在后面伤心的哭泣，因为一个小伙伴把他的两个里亚（里亚：法国古铜币名，相当于四分之一苏——译者注）抢走了。在她的想象里，这些有钱人家的、受人羡慕的孩子是没有什么烦恼的，但他居然在哭泣，这把她的心完全打乱了。于是，她走到他的身边，把他难过的原因弄清了，然后把她的全部私蓄都倒在他的手上。他没有丝毫犹豫，就收下钱，然后把眼泪擦干了。当时她高兴得发疯了，竟然吻了他一下。而他当时忙着数手中的钱，也没有拒绝她。看到自己没有遭到拒绝，她就热烈地拥抱他，然后跑开了。
　　“在这个可怜的小脑袋里，究竟有什么想法呢？是因为她把全部的财产都捐给了他，才发狂似的爱上这个小男孩呢，还是因为她把初吻献给了他才爱上他呢？无论对小孩还是对大人来说，这都是一个谜。
　　“后来几个月，她一直梦想着那个墓地的角落和那个小男孩。为了见到那个小男孩，她开始偷钱，她从父母修椅子挣得的钱中偷，从让她买东西的钱中偷，这掖一苏，那藏一苏。当她回到公墓附近的时候，口袋里装满了两个法郎。但是，他并不在那里。透过小舒凯父亲药房的玻璃窗，她看到柜台后面的他。他坐在一只装着红药水的大口瓶和装着蓝药水的大口瓶中间。看到这些色彩亮丽的玻璃瓶，她非常着迷。这只能让她更爱他。她把关于他的回忆永远珍藏在心中。
　　“第二年，她在他的学校附近遇见了他。他正在和同学玩弹子。她冲到他的身边，紧紧地、热烈地拥抱他，然后疯狂地吻他，直到他吓得尖叫起来。为了让他不喊叫，她把她全部的积蓄都给了他，一共是3法郎20生丁，真是一大笔钱啊。他目瞪口呆地望着她。
　　“此后，他允许她尽情地吻他。
　　“在此后的四年里，她把她所有的钱全都放进了男孩的手中，他也心安理得地拿钱和亲吻做交易。第一次，是30个苏，第二次是2个法郎。又有一次，她只有12个苏——她伤心、羞愧地哭泣起来，解释说那一年的光景实在太糟糕了，下一次，她来的时候带来了5法郎，一块大大的、圆圆的硬币，他高兴地笑了半天。
　　“除了小男孩，她谁都不想。而他有点焦急地盼望着她来。有的时候，他会跑过来迎接她，她感到心花怒放。
　　“后来有一天，他突然消失了。原来，他到寄宿学校读书去了。不过，经过小心谨慎的询问，她还是打听出来了。于是，她花了很大心思，让她的父母改变路线，好在他放假期的时候路过这里。经过一年的冥思苦想，她终于做到了。两年了，她没见过他，几乎认不出他了。他变化太大了，个子长高了，容貌更英俊了，还穿着一身金扣子的校服。走过去的时候，他假装没有看见她，甚至没有瞥一眼。
　　“她哭泣了两天。从此，她深受爱之苦，痛苦无穷。
　　“他每年都要回来，她都从他的面前走过，但是，她不敢看他一眼。而他，永远不会屈尊俯就地看她一眼。她爱他，非常疯狂，但也毫无希望。她对我说：他是我见过的唯一一个男人，我甚至不知道世界上还有其他男人存在。’
　　“她的父母去世了。她继续他们的行当。
　　“有一天，她回到这个魂牵梦绕的乡镇。她发现从舒凯的药房里，走出她心爱的人，但是还有一个年轻的女人，挽着他的胳膊。她是他的妻子。
　　“当天晚上，这个修软椅的女人就跳进了一条河里。经过那里的一个醉汉把她救了上来，送到药店里。小舒凯穿着睡衣，从楼上下来接待了她。他假装不认识她的样子，帮她脱掉衣服、按摩。然后，严厉地对她说：你简直发疯了，谁都不会做你这样的傻事！’
　　“他的话给了她再生的希望。因为他居然对她说话了！她幸福了很长时间。他不收她治疗的费用，但她再三坚持，他怎么也不接受。
　　“就这样，她的一生过去了。她工作的时候，还时时想着他。她开始去他的药房里买药，这就给她一个和他说话、亲密接触的机会。用这种方式，她仍然给他钱。
　　“前面我说过，今年春天的时候，她死了。当她结束她悲惨一生的时候，她恳求我把她毕生的积蓄交给她深爱的男人。她说，她只是为他工作。这样在她离世后，他还可以想起她。
　　“我给牧师50法郎，作为她的安葬费。第二天早晨，我就来到舒凯家。舒凯夫妇刚刚吃完早餐，面对面地坐在那里。夫妻二人肥头大耳、面光红润，一副得意洋洋、自我满足的样子。
　　“他们请我坐下，端上一些咖啡来。我拿过来喝了，然后，开始用颤抖的声音给他们讲这个故事。相信他们听完之后，一定会感动万分，甚至流下眼泪。
　　“舒凯一听到他被那个流浪的、修软垫椅的女人’爱恋着的时候，就愤慨地诅咒起来，好像她玷污了他的声誉、失去了人们对他的尊重和他宝贵的个人荣誉，似乎这些比他的性命还贵重一样。
　　“他的妻子跟他一样愤慨，不停地说：那个荡妇！那个荡妇！……’似乎没有什么话比这更能形容她的弥天大罪了。
　　“他站起来，开始在房间踱来踱去，还不断嘀咕着：大夫，您要明白，这是多么可怕的一件事啊！哦，如果她活着的时候我知道的话，我一定把她送到监狱！我发誓，她永远都出不来！’
　　“我目瞪口呆，没想到会是这样的结果，也不知道该说什么好。但是，我必须完成我的使命。于是，我说：她委托我把她的积蓄交给您，一共是3 500法郎。既然我刚才的话似乎使您非常不悦，或许，你应该把这些钱转交给穷人。’
　　“他们夫妇看着我，惊讶得一句话也说不出来。我从口袋里掏出不多的几千法郎。这笔可怜巴巴的钱来自不同的国家，金币和便士混杂在一起。然后我问：你们是怎么决定的呢？’
　　“舒凯太太首先说话：嗯……既然这是那个垂死女人的遗愿，我们拒绝接受似乎也不合适。’
　　“她的丈夫，有点害羞地说道：用这笔钱，我们还是可以给我们的孩子买点东西的。’
　　“我只是冷淡地说道：随你们所愿吧。’
　　“他又回答道：哦，无论如何，既然她委托您，那就把钱交给我们好了。我们会找到一个合适的方式把钱用到慈善事业上去的。’
　　“我把钱给了他们，弯腰行礼后就离开了。
　　“第二天，舒凯找我，直截了当地问：那个女人留下的那辆四轮马车在这里吧？——您怎样处理它了呢？’
　　“还没有处理，您要是想要就把它带走吧。’
　　“太好了，我正需要它呢。”他补充道，然后就起身走了。我把他叫回来，对他说：
　　她还留下一匹老马和两条狗，难道您不需要吗？’
　　他愕然地看着我：哎呀！不要！真的，我要它们有什么用呢？’
　　“随便您怎么处理吧。’他笑着伸出手来，把手递过来，我握了一下，我能做什么呢？在同一个国家，在同一个乡镇，医生和药剂师总不能反目为仇啊！
　　“我收养了那两条狗。牧师带走了那匹老马。对舒凯家来说，那辆马车非常有用。而那笔钱，他买了铁路债券。
　　“这是我有生以来，见过的唯一一份深沉、真诚的爱情。”
　　医生停下来，看了一眼侯爵夫人。只见她泪水满盈，她唉唉地叹口气，说：
　　“事实不容置疑，只有女人才知道怎样去爱！”


 